ALTERNATIVE MODELS OF CONNECTIVITY: RECLAIMING NETWORKED SPACES

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

A Thesis

Presented to

Emergent Digital Practices

University of Denver

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

In Partial Fulfillment

of the Requirements for the Degree

Master of Arts

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

by

Philip M. Bain

April 2015

Advisor: Conor McGarrigle

© Copyright by Philip M. Bain 2015

All Rights Reserved

 {#section .ListParagraph}

Author: Philip M. Bain

Title: ALTERNATIVE MODELS OF CONNECTIVITY

Advisor: Conor McGarrigle

Degree Date: June 2015

**Abstract**

Alternative networking is a growing field of study and practice due to
advancements in computer networking hardware, and software protocols.
Methods of integrating alternative networking configurations into
infrastructure present enhanced forms of empowerment and embodiment for
participants. Through an analysis of a multitude of hardware and
software examples, this research suggests that practices of sharing and
collaboration, which are embedded in the history of computer networking,
have the potential to reinvigorate the notion of a virtual public
sphere, and support the ideals of digital democracy.

**Acknowledgements**

I would like to thank my advisor Conor McGarrigle for helping me stay on
track. Thanks to my committee members Adrienne Russell and Chris
Coleman. Thanks to Laleh Mehren and Tim Weaver for assisting me with
difficult logistical concerns. Thanks to my partner Melissa Botner.

TABLE OF CONTENTS {#table-of-contents .TOCHeading}
=================

CHAPTER One: INTRODUCTION 6

CHAPTER Two: DIGITAL DEMOCRACY AND THE PUBLIC SPHERE 28

CHAPTER Three: NETWORKED SPACE AND INFRASTRUCTURE 41

CHAPTER Four: ALTERNATIVE MODELS OF CONNECTIVITY 63

CHAPTER Five: USE-CASES 81

**REFERENCES.................................................................................\....
91**

**APPENDIX.........................................................................................
96**

INTRODUCTION
============

**The State of the Internet**

The advent of computer networking brought with it promises of solutions
and conveniences to work in favor of humanity, but it also introduced
previously unfathomed problems and complications. Technology theorist
Benjamin Bratton, channeling French philosopher Paul Virillio states,
"the invention of any new technology is also the invention of a new kind
of accident."[^1] The Internet, a product of many minds building upon
the inventions of older minds, has been characterized as both a panacea
and an instrument of oppression.[^2] But, like any tool, it is only as
effective as the human beings who wield it. There have been a many
innovative new practices of creating hardware and software to create
information networks that enhance and compliment the Internet. These
alternative networking techniques have the power to promote digital
democracy and challenge incumbent access providers by fostering
community engagement and redefining our relationship with
infrastructure.

In today's techno-political climate, the Internet has been tamed by
agents powerful enough to control one or more aspects of its utility.
These include government agencies and technology firms, who work
together and against one another in a bid to claim maximum influence
over the network. Technology firms create suites of products, which
provide useful services to users, but also entrap them in walled gardens
characterized by inoperability between providers. While often these
services are offered to the user free of cost, these institutions
collect data from the users by storing and analyzing communication and
search history. This data is used to classify users into marketing
demographics, which is sold to media buyers who target them with
directed advertising. The government also has operations in place that
amass and catalogue enormous amounts of data on citizen behavior online,
including phone records and email communications. The most notable and
far-reaching of these operations is the NSA's PRISM program, which was
revealed to the public by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden in June
2013. The Snowden revelations brought these actions into the public eye,
but to many it reinforced what was already suspected; that the US
government was performing surveillance operations on its citizens and
worldwide. Yet, despite the disclosure of the PRISM program, true reform
has yet to take place. Collective outrage has not led to mobilization
against the NSA's policies, and many Internet users in America and
worldwide have been provided with ineffective means to protect their
privacy.

For others, these privacy issues are not a priority, for network access
is out of reach to them due to economic disparities stemming from
unequal deployment of networks by Internet service providers (ISPs), and
lack of technological competency. What is known as the digital divide
affects a certain segment of our country, and it is amplified along
trends consistent with social and economic inequality.[^3] Members of
lower socio-economic classes as well as minorities are disproportionally
affected by the technology gap.

There are issues surrounding the political importance of network
connectivity that fall prey to bipartisan disagreement and hegemonic
sway. The influence of mass media on the population, as described by
communications theorist and author Marshall McLuhan, has transferred to
the Internet in tandem with its rise to cultural popularity. McLuhan
suggests that the content of media is a distraction from its
effects.[^4] Media is constructed to subtly make people self-identity in
binary sides of agreement or disagreement with issues, eschewing
discourse for what Susan Herbst has termed "numbered voices."[^5] Mass
media is vessel for ideology, and consolidation of viewpoints into
organizations such as the Associated Press, present a limited viewpoint
into policies and issues that is shaped by the biases of a group of
elite. In *The Whole World is Watching,* Todd Gitlin outlines three
defining characteristics of mass media that position it as a "core
system for the distribution of ideology," pervasiveness, accessibility,
and centralized symbolic capacity.[^6] The latter of which, is defined
by the uniformity of the messages we receive from the media. In the
field of communications networking, consolidation of access providers
and content producers is a trend that continues to move forward,
stripping autonomy and agency from its potentials as a democratizing
force.

This paper begins by examining the prehistory of the Internet, some of
the notable innovations which spurred its development, and the sharing
principles that defined it early on. The philosophy of openness and
accessibility that motivated early technology visionaries created a
cultural movement of free and open source software that persists to this
day, and has been one of the strongest contributors of innovation to the
field of computer networking.

The paper then examines the concept of digital democracy and the idea of
Internet citizenship. The sharing practices, which underline many
networking projects, have given way to a political understanding of the
Internet's effect on society and social responsibility. As the Internet
developed into a major cultural tool, disparities have emerged,
illuminating its inextricable ties to issues facing society at large.
The research also examines some instances of using technology to
contribute to political interventions, and the outcomes, both positive
and negative, of its use in this capacity.

The research continues by discussing the relationship between network,
infrastructure, and embodiment, highlighting developments such as
wireless networking that contributed to a major shift in mobility and
how networks contribute to the way we locate ourselves in space using
technology. Activist movements surrounding the impact of networking on
the environment and society are examined. Through the work of theorists
such as Benjamin Bratton and Adrian Mackenzie, the model of the Internet
stack is applied to a larger scale illuminating connections between
ourselves and the planet with respect to the emergent networked world in
a process which Bratton has labeled "planetary-scale computation".[^7]
Bratton's example of the Black Stack demonstrates the cause and effect
scenario that computer networking exhibits on a massive scale.

The next chapter introduces the concept of alternative models of
connectivity. The research first defines the traditional model of
connectivity as commercial Internet access using a "last mile" Internet
service provider, such as Comcast or Time Warner Cable. This model is
problematic because it trades a level of convenience for freedom of
access. As ISPs further consolidate, they shape the perception that
adhering to this model is the only option for individuals to utilize
networking technology, contributing to an impoverished view of the
potential applications of communications networking. In a 2014
interview, Isaac Wilder, the co-founder of the Free Network Foundation,
which is an organization committed to promoting alternative models of
connectivity, astutely points out that when we talking about the
Internet, we're really talking about two elements that are independent.
"We\'re combining a discreet, material collection of 45,000‑odd
autonomous communication systems, with the body of protocols and
specifications, which allowed those networks to inter‑operate... It\'s
the networks and it\'s the protocols."[^8] This distinction is important
because the protocols, the written codes that govern computer networking
processes, are in an intellectual commons, and are free to be used by
anyone.[^9] Alternative models of connectivity can strive to alleviate
some of the undesirable conditions outlined in the previous chapters by
innovating new ways to connect people, relying less on restrictive
commercial models. Alternative networking projects can lead to community
engagement, and in that vein they support digital democracy. The
possible ways in which alternative networks operate are detailed here,
as well as focus on some practical examples.

The final chapter examines a selected group of real-world use cases that
have employed alternative networking techniques. All over the world
there are many groups working towards providing new networking
possibilities to the public, often under grassroots beginnings. Large
scale initiatives, such as Catalina, Spain's Guifi network are analyzed,
as well as more localized projects such as Redhook Wireless in Brooklyn,
New York.

**A History of Networking**

In the 1960's when the United States was deeply involved in the Cold War
with the Soviet Union, researchers were considering the problem of the
centralized communications infrastructure that was prevalent at the
time. Due to the nature of the centralized model, communication hubs
were at risk of being incapacitated by an enemy attack. At the time,
telecommunications were achieved by routing a message through a central
location, and then to its intended destination. The government exercised
its authority through a protocol referred to as "command and control."
In this fashion, instructions could be sent from authority figures to
the routing location, and then disseminated to their target. The
inherent danger of this type of implementation is that, if the routing
location becomes destroyed or disabled, communications fail, and the
network falls apart. The consideration is that this would lead to a
catastrophic failure of the government's ability to exercise command and
control during wartime. As the threat of nuclear war was very high, the
effects of dismantling the communications infrastructure of our country
would be devastating, because it would lead to the lack of tactical
options in the event of nuclear war. The centralized model of networking
was demonstrated to be insufficient due to this Achilles heel, and so
the concept of "survivable communications\" was born.

A researcher named Paul Baran, working for the RAND Corporation, a
military think-tank in the United States, introduced a new networking
model that could overcome the major defect presented by centralization.
Baran described a communications network where each node was connected
to its nearest neighbors. This system, known as a distributed network,
could withstand an attack on some of its nodes, while maintaining
functional connectivity within the graph. Figure 1.1 shows Baran's
diagram of the three most common network types. His research on
survivable communications was motivated by the belief that maintaining
command and control would decrease the chances of retaliatory action
caused by a disruption of communications. ![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:net-paul-baran-on-distributed-communications-networks-1962.jpg](media/image1.jpeg){width="5.989583333333333in"
height="4.216666666666667in"}

Figure 1.1: Baran\'s Network Diagram

The United States even published Baran's work openly so the Soviet Union
could benefit as well, and retain command and control of their own
country. It was feared that miscommunication and misunderstanding
between the two nations could be an unintentional catalyst to starting
war; therefore, sharing this information was understood to be in the
best interest of both sides. In 2001, Wired magazine featured an
interview by Stewart Brand with Paul Baran where they discussed sharing
the paper. "We *published* it! I gave a course on it at the University
of Michigan in \'65. We were a hell of a lot better off if the Soviets
had a better command and control system. Their command and control
system was even worse than ours."[^10]

Initially his peers at the research center deemed Baran's network
configuration as unfeasible, but he also developed a protocol for
routing data in this manner, which he deemed "hot potato routing." This
protocol would evolve into a method called packet switching that would
become one of the most important foundations of the Internet.[^11]
Packet switching involves compartmentalizing data into smaller pieces,
or packets, consisting of 1024 bits. Each packet contains header
information that includes address, and sequencing information, which is
used to reassemble the data in the correct order at its
destination.[^12] Figure 1.2 is a model of a sample packet with a header
and payload.

The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) included the process of
packet switching into its ARPANET project, a direct predecessor of the
Internet. Engineers at ARPA were seeking to find ways to network the
various computer systems used by universities and research institutions
across the country. One of the challenges faced by ARPANET was to
discover a universal method for connection between the many different
types of computer hardware that were used. This initiative eventually
led to the development of communications strategy known as layering. In
*Inventing the Internet* Janet Abbate describes this process as
"dividing complex networking tasks into modular building blocks."[^13]
Layering is represented as a hierarchal model, where functions are
passed top down between each layer before being transmitted across the
network to a receiving node, where information is then passed bottom to
top. This would become known as the network stack, and along with packet
switching, become an elementary unit of the Internet. The stack model,
and some of its evolutions and appropriations are discussed in further
detail in Chapter 5.![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:lec-21-packet.png](media/image2.png){width="5.989583333333333in"
height="1.5152777777777777in"}

Figure 1.2: A Sample Data Packet

The principles of packet switching and the network stack, along with
several other important developments, led to the distributed structure
of the Internet, which was most evident during its nascent years in the
1990's. The indiscriminate nature of packet switching laid the
foundations for the general ethos of openness that prevailed early on.
In the 1970's, a team called the Network Working Group (NWG) was looking
for ways to invite discourse among various teams of researchers and
engineers contributing to the ARPANET. They began distributing meeting
minutes, and other documentation via Request for Comments papers. This
invited deliberation and collaboration, and was a successful means to
achieve consensus on policies.[^14] This practice of sharing and
openness would continue to be an essential principle as ARPANET evolved
and the Internet emerged.

**Free and Open Source Software**

The Request for Comments papers could be looked at as a predecessor to
the Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) movement that emerged in the
1980's. Usenet was an early discussion community that provided a space
for computer enthusiasts to post messages and articles. As a result of
its popularity, Usenet is considered to be a major catalyst for the FOSS
movement, because of the ease with which people could share code across
the network.[^15] In 1983, Richard Stallman, founder of the Free
Software Foundation introduced the GNU General Public License (GPL),
which outlined a set of standards to be followed by creators of free
software. It is worth noting that "free" in this context refers to the
freedom of distribution and modification of the software, rather than
free of cost.[^16] One of the stipulations of the GPL declares that
derivative works must inherit the same licensing conditions applied to
the parent. This has occasionally caused tensions amid the FOSS
community when corporations incorporate free software into their
commercial offerings and charge for them.[^17]

The GPL was a major influence on the early Internet community, and
helped create a policy of sharing among programmers and tech
enthusiasts. This openness was responsible for many of the services that
developed much later, "such as Amazon.com, Google, and eBay, as well
as... communication applications such as VoIP, BitTorrent, and other P2P
services."[^18] Open software more specifically refers to making the
source code available for anyone to read and modify at will. The
ideology behind this encourages collaboration and sharing to achieve the
best quality output.

One very successful example of this was the Apache web server project.
Apache is FOSS software that is used in 57.8% of all websites as of
April 2015.[^19] Apache is a webserver, which means that it processes
HTTP requests (the basic means of data communication on the web). Apache
communicates on the application layer of the protocol stack, passing
data one layer down to the transport layer.

At the risk of over simplifying, webservers are the engine that drives
websites on the Internet, and Apache has been the market leader every
year since its introduction in 1996.[^20] As a FOSS project, Apache was
developed by volunteers, many of whom had day jobs and could only spare
a little time to work on it.[^21] Despite this, the project group used
collaborative management styles and self-regulation to delegate
workloads to volunteers. Apache's role in the formation of the Internet
as we know it today cannot be overstated. In 2005, Apache's market share
was as much as 70% of websites.[^22] The decline in use is also
attributed to the open source nature of the project, for newer
technologies such as Nginx, and offerings by Google and Microsoft were
built on the knowledge and code presented by Apache.

**Ascension of the Big Five**

While openness as an ideology still drives many individuals and groups
who develop Internet technology, the rise of a handful of tech giants
has passed powerful elements of ownership and control to a few governing
bodies. The most notable of these corporations are part of a group
referred to as the Big Five. They include Apple, Microsoft, Google,
Amazon, and Facebook, as seen in Figure 1.3.[^23]

As a result, these corporations have been driven through competition to
strengthen and protect their brand and exert control over the way
individuals use the Internet. The strategy employed by these technology
firms is to develop products that engage users with their tech
ecosystem, and promote reliance on their services. Many of these
companies operate in unique but overlapping realms. They each have a
notable strength, but compete upon a common ground: the commercial
technology landscape. By encapsulating their users, these companies are
able to shape user behavior and them to their specific product.

One of the most notable examples of this is Apple's iTunes store.
Debuting in 2001 the iTunes store provided a convenient way for
consumers to purchase music. However Apple implemented DRM, or digital
rights management software, which bound the files to users devices.
Users who purchased music were not allowed to share their libraries, or
play them on unauthorized devices.[^24]

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:InternetBigFiveChartv1.png](media/image3.png){width="6.0in"
height="4.329861111111111in"}

Figure 1.3: The Big Five and their worth

The most popular website in the world is Google.com.[^25] At its heart
Google is a search engine, and as such it is the de facto gateway to the
Internet for the majority of users. The third most popular website is
the video service YouTube.com, which happens to be owned by Google.
YouTube claims its 1 billion monthly users upload more than 300 hours of
video each minute.[^26]

These figures show the enormous amount of influence that the tech giants
command in populations around the globe. So much so, that many people
aren't aware of the platforms they are using is part of the Internet at
all.[^27] It is in the best interests of the tech giants, as well as
other commercial and government forces to spin the narrative that the
Internet is comprised of (and indeed, supported by) mainly their
products. The consolidation of entertainment and communication avenues
is impeding the masses from understanding the stake that we all have in
control of the Internet's future.

There is a concern that generations down the line will not be aware of
the level of control that one can wield by utilizing this technology.
Imagine a world where Tumblr is your only blog, YouTube your only way to
share videos, Spotify your only means of accessing music, Facebook your
only way to communicate with friends. These are all amazing products in
their own right, supported by legions of talented engineers producing
sophisticated user experiences. But as these companies refine their
services, so do they also seek to maximize profits at the expense of
user-autonomy. They are the culture-makers, and their purpose is to gain
as much market share as possible. Just as the telephone conglomerates
slowly bought out the rural telephone collectives, these tech
corporations make efforts to hook the consumer.[^28]

**Invasive Marketing Tactics**

Marketers are using network technology in new ways to identify potential
customers and collect behavioral data. One method for this is to ping
shoppers' phones as they enter a retail store. Wireless devices have
several unique identifiers such as a MAC address that is broadcasted by
the device when probing for Wi-Fi networks. A retailer can implement
software that catalogs these MAC addresses, assigning them to a specific
user profile. When that user enters the store, certain attributes are
stored; such as how long they were inside, where in the store they
spending time, and when they last visited. See Figure 1.4 for an example
of these tracking beacons at work. This technology, sometimes coupled
with video surveillance equipment, can gain large amounts of behavioral
data about individuals and can be used to target them with more specific
advertising campaigns. The New York Times reported this activity when a
popular retailer, Nordstrom, posted signs notifying customers that they
were being tracked.[^29] Many customers were upset, but retailers claim
they are disadvantaged by the tracking capabilities available to online
stores, and this is a means to catch up.

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:proximity-marketing-large.jpg](media/image4.jpeg){width="6.0in"
height="4.731944444444444in"}

Figure 1.4: Example of Retail Tracking Beacons

A New York company called Nomi offers tracking technology to vendors,
including MAC address identification. Nomi recently got in trouble for
their practices due to presenting inadequate security tactics, and
misleading customers about their opt-out policy.[^30] The FTC took Nomi
to court to contest these practices. Nomi claimed that they randomized
the MAC address of consumers so individuals wouldn't be profiled, but
their encryption scheme simply produced new identification hashes that
remained identifiable to individual shoppers. They also allowed users to
upload their MAC address to the Nomi database blacklist to prevent
tracking, however shoppers were never told they were being tracked, nor
were they aware of which stores were engaging in this activity, so the
courts deemed the policy as worthless.[^31] Fortunately, in a victory
for consumers, the courts instructed Nomi to fix their misleading
consumer protection policies, placed some restrictions on how to
continue their operations under threat of \$16,000 fines per each
violation.[^32]

Apple recently introduced MAC randomizing for their iPhones in an effort
to protect consumer privacy and security. In doing so, this could combat
the practice of MAC tracking in a retail store, because the MAC
identification would be encrypted directly from the device itself. This
feature would appear to be another victory for consumer privacy, however
an investigation by analytics company AirTight Wireless discovered that
certain specific conditions must be in place for the randomizing to work
properly on the phone. AirTight Wireless reports that the iPhone device
cannot be connected to a wireless network, and must also be in sleep
mode.[^33] Consumer privacy is a growing concern, and fortunately there
seem to be efforts made to protect this by some groups. Yet, these
protections sometimes come with strings attached, so it is important to
analyze their effectiveness. While some of Apple's recent security
initiatives indicate an appreciation for customer rights, they can be
misleading.

**Net Neutrality, politics and hegemony**

With the widespread adoption of the Internet in society, one of the
things that is bound to occur is a myriad of opinions and
misinterpretations of Internet policies and protocols. Public discourse
on Internet policy and governance has privileged the view of powerful
technology companies who have, through their use of lobbyists and
corporate strategists, made significant contributions to the public
imaginary. It could be argued that those who control the language
surrounding these topics can shape public understanding of the issues;
this has resulted in a struggle to define the terms and indeed the
language of this debate between the large corporate actors and
stakeholders with opposing views. Due to the complex and seemingly
unattainable nature of programming code and protocols, it is difficult
to ensure fair and balanced understanding of the surrounding issues,
particularly when interested parties make efforts to sway the dialogue
in ways that support their interests.

At the forefront of this battlefield is the concept of net neutrality.
This concept is one of the fundamental topics of contention between the
commercial interests and tech community. The term was coined by Columbia
Law School professor and media scholar Tim Wu in his 2003 paper *Network
Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination*.[^34] In the paper Wu describes
the concept of an open and neutral Internet, contrasting it with the
increasing control of private interests. His opening statement is a
prescient analysis of what, 12 years later, is still *the* hot button
topic in the Internet debate. He writes, "communications regulators over
the next decade will spend increasing time on conflicts between the
privates interests of broadband providers and the public's interest in a
competitive innovation environment centered on the Internet."[^35] Wu's
main concern is that the short term interests of the cable companies
which were, at the time, rapidly becoming the ubiquitous and near-sole
proprietors of Internet access that we see today, would stifle the long
term potentials of Internet technologies in favor of commercial gain.

Today the discussion over net neutrality has entered the public
spotlight as a central issue of debate, but is often misconstrued or
improperly defined. In politics, net neutrality carries associations
that are tangential to the issues first brought up by Wu in his paper.
The mainstream media has polarized the issue into two diametrically
opposed ideologies, which conveniently fit into a left and right
political narrative, whereas in reality the issue is more nuanced and
crosses political divides. Since the FTC has begun operations to change
the practices of major telecoms, pundits have appropriated the argument,
using it as evidence of increased, unwanted government interference.

Two of the largest Internet providers in the country, Comcast and Time
Warner Cable announced in 2014, to much fervor, plans for an impending
merger. Because these two companies together served a large percentage
of the United States Internet users, many Internet rights activists
looked at this as the formation of a monopoly with negative implications
for consumers.[^36] Comcast had acquired the television content producer
NBC Universal in 2013, and that deal was also criticized because of the
resultant situation of corporate vertical integration. By owning a
content producer and the means of distribution, opponents argued Comcast
would have an unfair advantage in the market, see Figure 1.5 for a
layout of all Comcast/NBC\'s media properties.[^37] With so many
channels of distribution, Comcast has the ability to expose its
ideologies to a vast number of people. Another concern was the
possibility for Comcast to prioritize NBC content over their competitors
on the Internet. This seemed to materialize when Comcast was accused of
slowing down the streaming speeds of its competitor Netflix, an
entertainment video service.[^38] The public seems to oppose their
business practices, as Comcast regularly finds itself on the list for
"most hated company in America."[^39] In April 2015 proponents of net
neutrality were pleased to discover that Comcast had terminated the
merger due to low expectations of its possibility for approval by the
FTC.[^40]

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:comcastverticalintegration.jpg](media/image5.jpeg){width="6.0in"
height="4.134027777777778in"}

Figure 1.5: With the purchase of NBC, Comcast owns all of these media
properties.

A common argument levied against net neutrality asks, "why do we need to
change the Internet? It seems to work just fine to me." However, cyber
attacks are becoming more and more frequent, and are predicted only to
grow in the future.[^41] Part of the reason for this is because the
protocols and practices used, such as the centralized DNS, the HTTP
methods, and authentication procedures are too dated, and have not kept
up with advancements in computational power, browser handling, and
security updates, such as patches.

DIGITAL DEMOCRACY AND THE PUBLIC SPHERE
=======================================

**Digital Democracy**

Digital democracy is the application of democratic ideals to the context
of the Internet and other digital technologies. The concept of digital
democracy is polarizing in the tech world due to several reasons. When
the Internet was first gaining popularity, there were many who saw in it
potential for the reinvigoration of the public sphere, and as a driver
of social change. This led to a phase in which some scholars and
activists predicted a utopian near-future that would herald a new age of
equality. Over time this did not materialize to the extent that was
hoped. Several incidents occurred that eroded optimism for the benefits
of the Internet. The big five technology giants emerged and ascended to
dominance, which was seen as a blow to the open source ethos. Worldwide
protests in the over income inequality dubbed the Occupy movement was
slowly stamped out, and a once promising social movement in the Middle
East, the Arab Spring, was crushed by their totalitarian governments,
despite the early success in part related to the public's use of
technology.[^42] As a result, a backlash occurred, producing skeptics
who saw more realism in the view that the Internet was a more
utilitarian product that was subject to the same flaws as other societal
institutions that perpetuate inequality.

Regardless, the concept of digital democracy lingered, and in fact it is
still a vibrant area of interest by academics. Culture on the Internet
has many subsets, and different camps or beliefs co-exist. It is known
widely believed by proponents, that encouraging practices of digital
democracy can be effective in promoting a more egalitarian society. It
is also been widely reported that tech inequality is an important and
very real issue that follows similar trends of inequality in other
aspects. For instance age, race, and social class are variables proven
to have a correlation with technological literacy.[^43]

**The Public Sphere**

Often, particularly in the nascent days of the networking, the Internet
was presented as an opportunity to reinvigorate the public sphere and
provide a democratizing force that could be used to support civic
discourse. Technology itself does not have any inherent agency towards
producing social change, rather it presents itself as a tool to be used
by human agents for that end.[^44] The capacity for using the Internet
as a tool for the public sphere is also dependent on an individual's
access and competency with the technology.[^45] This suggests that
people who have easy access and higher competency using the Internet are
at an advantage to employ the technology for this purpose.

The goal of the public sphere is to provide a space for discourse among
participants to enact policies that are determined to be in the interest
of the public good. Participants in the discussion are ostensibly trying
to seek a consensus over policies that can be most beneficial to the
public. Due to the varying degrees of private opinion, achieving this
could be in danger of an unbalanced consensus that privileges those who
have the best resources to participate, and are the most vocal.
Therefore it is understood that facilitating and encouraging access to
the most people will produce more balanced results.

Additionally the means of access to the Internet, and applications of
discourse upon it, are provided by corporations who control this
technology. As such, the most power of influence falls onto them,
further unbalancing the opinions that are produced. As Zizi Papacharisi
illustrates her paper *The Internet, the Public Sphere, and Beyond*,
this "produces discourse dominated by the objectives of advertising and
public relations. Thus, the public sphere becomes a vehicle for
capitalist hegemony and ideological reproduction."[^46] Alternative
networking techniques, such as community broadband, and localized
private networks offer a potential solution to this by cutting out the
owners of the means of access, and engaging community needs directly.
Not only does this allow community consensus on network access and
infrastructure development, but it also offers opportunities for
community moderation and regulation.[^47]

As Papachirisi points out, via Susan Herbst, the media often portrays
public opinion by the use of polls rather than the results of thorough
discourse, leading to the "numbered voices" phenomenon, where
respondents are aggregated into binary positions on issues, tabulating
these results into a majority vs. minority model.[^48] This is not only
reductive, but by disseminating opinions in the manner, it reinforces
individuals to take sides rather than engage in critical thinking.
Because of the ability of the Internet to muster large groups of people
into discussion areas, the distillation of opinion into yes or no
responses is a danger.[^49] This is another advantage alternative
networking configurations can have over the highly connected Internet.
Smaller networks can benefit by providing a higher level of recognition
for individual voices, and thus producing more meaningful discussion,
rather than the roll-call approach exhibited by massive public opinion
polls.

The most important feature of a public sphere is the capacity for
discourse over bipolar agreement. However due to some features of the
Internet, particularly the relative anonymity of users, true discourse
is difficult to produce. Scientific American reports that "lack of
accountability, physical distance, and the medium of writing" itself are
major contributing factors to the difficulty of constructive online
discourse.[^50] Rudeness and aggressive behavior not only prevent
critical discussion from taking place, they may also discourage other
potential voices from participating.

Community built network infrastructure has the ability to bind people
together due to the collaborative efforts in construction and
maintenance, as well as through the ultimate goal of inclusiveness they
present. Such characteristics may help to alleviate the symptoms of
inappropriate online behavior due to accountability and mutual goals.
Also, when taking into account the proximity factor, and the varied
distribution of beliefs and morals, a global public sphere may not be
the most favorable objective for creating consensus, and in fact
localizing discourse could produce more egalitarian outcomes.[^51]

Papacharissi classifies the challenges facing a virtual public sphere in
to three distinct categories: access, reciprocity, and
commercialization.[^52] Access refers to the ability to access the
Internet, and the quality of service available to individuals.
Reciprocity refers to the quality and authenticity of online discussion,
including the level of participation. It also includes the ability for
geographically and politically disparate parties to find terms of
agreement. The global nature of the Internet connects people from all
over the world who do not necessarily share the same values or desired
outcomes of social policies. Commercialization refers to the influence
of economically driven business entities upon the attitudes of public
and the ability to incentivize behaviors that support the marketization
of their product. These factors, it is argued, reduce the possibility of
democratic outcomes from the utilization of the Internet as a virtual
public sphere. Papacharissi's definitions are supported by the consensus
that there is no true public sphere online and seem to indicate that
prospects are not hopeful. However her analysis is insufficient to
preclude the possibility of the emergence of a public sphere due to the
lack of investigation into network alternatives to the Internet. The
developments outlined in this paper of emergent network alternatives
counter these challenges and show promise of a reinvigorated notion of a
virtual public sphere.

**Benefits and Shortcomings**

It is clear that traditional models of connectivity have a tendency to
discriminate against groups of lower socio-economic status. Access to
the Internet through ISPs comes at a cost that may be out of reach for
some. Additionally, infrastructure owners do not typically provide
services to geographic locations that are not profitable or sustainable
to be deployed. Alternative models of connectivity such as community
designed mesh networks can circumvent the need to force alignment with
an ISP by amplifying and sharing a few access points to the larger
community. Initiatives such as Guifi, and Red Hook Wireless, which will
be examined in more detail later in this paper, find ways to mobilize
neglected communities to implement their own network infrastructure to
serve a much larger number of people. An added benefit of community run
networks is that they have higher levels of engagement and provide
bonding opportunities due to the collaboration involved.[^53] Mesh
networks using Wi-Fi technology by design are better applied to higher
population density areas because of the necessarily limited distance
between nodes. But rural areas can benefit from alternative networking
techniques such as free space optical (FSO) communication. FSO networks
most commonly utilize laser light or LED technology to create data links
between distances of up to 3 km.[^54]

However, an interesting aspect of community-led network infrastructure
is that it actually inverts the notion that they typically are produced
in disadvantaged communities, thus actually catering to communities that
have less than satisfactory Internet service.

Geographically separate communities hold different morals and may not be
able to find consensus on social issues. This is a hindrance to the idea
of a global public sphere, but perhaps that should not be considered as
an ultimate goal for proponents of a virtual public sphere. If focused
on a local or regional level, a virtual public sphere becomes much more
viable. The Internet's development into a planetary wide network has
fostered perceptions that a global society is the final outcome of
connectivity. But it is worth considering that regional politics could
work from the ground up to contribute to more egalitarian behaviors
among the world's many cultures. Additionally, perceived anonymity has
the tendency to contribute to less courteous conduct online. Again,
community initiatives can combat this behavior because in smaller
groups, individuals are more likely to be recognized, as well as be
motivated to be supportive of members of their social circle. Federated
social networking services such as Diaspora are designed to emphasize
community participation, by allowing individuals to join smaller
networks based on region or like-minded interests.[^55] While this can
sometimes have the echo chamber effect of reinforced ideals,
self-moderation is more likely to occur in these scenarios, and
cultivate more reasonable interaction between individuals.

Co-option of participatory spaces by corporations is an issue facing
constructive discourse within networked spaces. There has been and
increased popularity of native advertising, online where commercial
interests attempt to situate advertising content within the context of
the platform its targeting. For example online journals or blogs may
feature advertising content that matches the aesthetic of the site it is
featured on, masquerading as original research. In this manner
advertisers attempt to influence the audience to support their product,
without contributing to valid discussion. Networks that are deployed by
communities working together have greater control over who is able to
join, and can be more vigilant against unauthorized or unrequested
input. Further, networks operating privately, isolated from the Internet
are not vulnerable to unwanted encroachment by commercial entities.

**Digital Citizenship & Participation**

An important component of digital democracy is the idea of digital
citizenship, which is the understanding that much of our civic
responsibilities are now possible to engage in online. Nearly every
governmental resource and service is accessible online.[^56] The types
of activities that can be accomplished online include "filing taxes,
applying for permits, paying tickets or fines, requesting birth and
death records, renewing driver's licenses, registering to vote... or
submitting complaints."[^57] The Internet makes managing these services
easier from an administrative standpoint, as well as partaking in them
by citizens. Using this evidence Mossberger illustrates that political
citizenship in society is positively correlated with practicing digital
citizenship online.[^58] Yet, these duties are not exclusive to the
Internet and can be accessed through other means. As such, Mossberger
acknowledges that the accessibility of political services online may not
solely be strong enough evidence to demonstrate the urgency of promoting
digital citizenship in society. However, she presents research that
shows a link between Internet access and increased civic participation
by way of enabling access to political news sources, fostering political
interest.[^59]

**Internet-centrism**

Author and media activist Robert McChesney identifies two viewpoints
that inform the discussion over how the Internet contributes to digital
democracy. He co-opts the terms "celebrants" and "skeptics" from Robin
Mansell, to categorize the opposing ideologies.[^60] Within the Internet
research community, academics tend to project opinions based in one or
the other of these views, he argues. The celebrants champion the
Internet's potential for democratization and civic participation. They
see the Internet as a technology which can serve the public interest and
strengthen egalitarianism in society. Conversely, the skeptics view the
Internet as a false promise, co-opted by governments and corporate firms
to control and, at worst, oppress the public. Of course, as McChesney
acknowledges, "there is no Berlin wall" between the two ideologies, and
intelligent people should recognize truths on both sides of the
discussion to form a more holistic opinion. However, it can be helpful
to isolate and analyze theories that emerge from each side of the debate
in order to extrapolate the concerns surrounding networked technology
and perhaps to alleviate the conflict in some way. Taken alone, neither
viewpoint adequately provides a resolution to the concerns, but by
selecting relevant arguments, we can form a more useful larger picture
of the network's role in democracy.

The Internet-centric celebrants see the democratic force of the Internet
as unstoppable, but tend to overlook the reality that access to the
network itself and its services are controlled by a small group of
actors who provide them at a cost. Ironically, a major contributor to
the restrictive nature of the Internet is the general public's lack of
knowledge regarding how networks work. The tech firms employ the
strategy of walled gardens to encapsulate users within their product
line. Users tend to become vertically associated with services provided
by a single corporation, thus making it difficult to defend against
unfair practices such as price gouging, or terms of service
modification. Alternatives exist, particularly through the work of the
Free and Open Source Software movement.

FOSS products are a huge benefit to alternative networking
possibilities, because they enable a variety of ready-made services to
be applied, and they foster prolific communities for discussion and
instruction. Alternative networks can circumvent some of the
restrictions established by the major tech firms by utilizing FOSS
products and embracing their philosophy.

**Media and hegemony**

As unidirectional communication systems, newspaper, radio, and
television have a much easier time of disseminating the ideology of the
few, to the minds of the masses. Control of these technologies allows a
small group to manage a larger group by dictating, either overtly or
subconsciously, the codes and behaviors that are to be followed by the
population. As Todd Gitlin writes, referencing political theorist
Antonio Gramsci, "those who rule the dominant institutions secure their
power in large measure directly and indirectly, by impressing their
definitions of the situation upon those they rule and, if not usurping
the whole of ideological space, still limiting what is thought
throughout the society."[^61] This applies to those who control the
means of mass communication in a society as well. However, alternative
networks, as a multi-function communication technology, can defy command
by a single entity, dispensing power equally and without discrimination.

**Iceland's Kitchenware Revolution**

As a relatively nascent technology, the Internet has flirted with
enacting real change in the sphere of social movements in several ways.
Twitter, for example, was a powerful tool for mobilizing protesters
during the series of political upheavals in the Middle East referred to
as the Arab Spring in 2011. But to facilitate the non-violent
restructuring of an ineffective and unpopular political system of a
first world nation calls to attention the democratic power of network
technology.

One instance of a cultural shift powered by the democratic use of
technology is the so-called "kitchenware revolution" of Iceland in
2009.[^62] Named so because protestors drummed upon pots and pans, and
other such kitchenware to create a cacophony in front of the government
buildings; see Figure 2.1 for an example of this. In 2008, the country
of Iceland experienced a major financial crisis that affected their
economic and political landscape. In fact, that year a number of nations
of the world, including the United States and the United Kingdom, were
also severely affected by the economic crash. What sets Iceland apart
from these other incidents, is how rapidly they bounced back, and how
drastically they shifted their political system subsequently. Manuel
Castells writes of this revolution, "while provoked by the economic
crisis, \[it\] was not only about restoring the economy. It was
primarily about a fundamental transformation of the political system
that was blamed for its incapacity to manage the crisis, and its
subordination to the banks."[^63]

The 2008 financial crisis brought the country to a halt. Sparked by
widespread corruption stemming from the privatization of Iceland's
banks, the economic crash stirred a revolutionary air amongst the
people. After a series of protests in 2008 and 2009, the Icelandic
ruling class was forced out. The most dramatic development to come from
Iceland's political revolution was not the governmental changeover, but
the level of civic participation that ensued. A previously unseen form
of social collaboration was introduced, wherein the government actually
turned to the people asking for input on the formation of a new
constitution by way of online social media.

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:iceland-economy-protests-2-630x406.jpg](media/image6.jpeg){width="5.989583333333333in"
height="3.865972222222222in"}

Figure 2.1: Protestors in Iceland bang pots and pans

In 2012, The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) ranked Iceland number two in the world, for highest percentage of
households connected to the Internet, at 94.6%.[^64] This permeation of
Internet literacy in Iceland proved to be integral in facilitating the
collaboration amongst the population in creating the document that was
to become Iceland's national constitution.

A constitutional assembly counsel (CAC) was established, which then
utilized several popular social tools on the web in order to create a
dialogue with the people with three main directives. The world's largest
social networking website, Facebook, was the main platform on which
discussion and debate was staged. For instant updates and direct
interaction, the micro-blogging service Twitter was utilized. Lastly, to
bridge the physical gap and bring events and personalities closer to the
people, photos and videos were shared via official channels on the media
content hosting sites Flickr, and YouTube.[^65] To have this level of
public participation and collaboration is unprecedented. It is rare that
a government would choose to reach deep into its base of citizenry to
research and gauge the desires of its people. This may be one of the
first real examples of the Internet as a cultural necessity in modern
history.

Iceland's example shows the ability of the Internet to subvert the
ruling ideology of a culture in an unpredictable way. As evidenced by
the continued disregard by bankers and politicians of the warning signs
prior to the economic collapse, hegemonic powers will stop at nothing to
maintain control over a population. However, channeled through the use
of Internet technologies, and powered by a nationalistic bond, the
counter-hegemony asserted by the Icelandic population overruled the
failed practices of the elite. Iceland's kitchenware revolution was
spurred by a reaction to a major crisis, and this may be a contributing
factor to its initial success.

NETWORKED SPACE AND INFRASTRUCTURE
==================================

**Situating Cyberspace**

In order to better understand the role of networks in our culture, it
may be helpful to consider where they are situated. Recognizing their
location can provide insight into their significance and function. There
are two values to consider when discussing networked space. The first is
the material space, occupied by cables, antennas, and facilities devoted
to housing and maintaining them. This is the infrastructural space,
acting as a corporeal representation of networks. The second is the more
intangible, meta-space, often referred to as cyberspace.[^66] This
meta-space has its own rules of time and distance, which aren't required
to be in sync with reality. Content on the network, such as websites and
apps, are hosted on servers located in the physical world, but due to
the fact our senses cannot perceive the transfer of data at the speed
which electrons travel through copper of fiber-optic cable, the illusion
of instantaneous communication is fostered in our minds.

**Networked Infrastructure**

Traditionally, infrastructure has been relegated to the background,
where even the intrusive support beams try to remain unseen. The
structures and devices that work silently to take on society's heavy
workloads often have unintentional or hidden effects on culture. With
regard to computer networking in particular, infrastructure can take the
form of lengthy CAT-6 cables, large server rooms, and bulky Wi-Fi access
points, to name a few examples.[^67] Despite the inherent physicality of
these elements, designers and architects work hard to make them as
unobtrusive as possible. Tucked within the walls, and strung above the
ceiling, miles of Ethernet cables connect wall ports to repeaters and
routers in any given office building. The act of hiding "offensive"
infrastructure elements has been in practice for centuries for reasons
of safety as well as aesthetics; exposing electrical wires in the home
could have deadly consequences. The implications of this are that
discussions surrounding the role of infrastructure and its cultural
effects have been very limited. The seeming innocuousness of
infrastructure has provided it with a respite from scrutiny.

The proliferation of Wi-Fi over the last decade has brought attention to
the unforeseen implications of mobile computing. Adrian Mackenzie
suggests that the cultural shifts afforded by Wi-Fi have placed
computer-networking infrastructure in a more prominent position for
analysis, "the different practices, motifs, and performances of space,
sociality, embodiment, and control entwining in Wi-Fi need then to be
situated in the context of the ongoing development of new media and
computer networks as sites of cultural construction of identity, value,
mobility, work, space, and time."[^68] Positing Wi-Fi as a site of
"cultural construction" provides a context for understanding how
networks can be reflective of societal organization. We use networks as
extensions of ourselves by storing data (photos, emails) and sharing
them with one another as part a new perception of space and time.
Additionally, these networked spaces remove and redefine borders,
constructing new, virtual infrastructures and shaping different types of
relationships between space, and ourselves.

Wireless altnets are a natural extension of this idea, in that they
represent a kind of dimensional shift in the notion of Wi-Fi. Products
like the Flutter wireless whose nodes boast a range of up to 1 km, can
enable communities and social groups to develop networks an order of
magnitude larger than a home Wi-Fi network, perhaps not to enterprise
scale, but they can expand the geotechnical space into innovative new
territory.[^69] While single homes may have networks situated within the
boundaries of one property, whole neighborhoods could interconnect to
produce a larger community networks that contribute to the "construction
of culture," or community that Mackenzie describes.

The strategy of the technostructure typically privileges the demands of
the technology ahead of the needs of the community. Limitations of
technology or the design generally dictate the structure of the network.
Network cables are limited by bandwidth in how long they can be before
losing effectiveness. CAT-6 cables, the current standard in wired
networking, can run about 100 meters safely. This limitation imposes a
design constraint on the network. To extend this, infrastructure
designers can install powered bridges or repeaters to amplify the
signal. Again, this imposes additional restrictions such as the need for
server rooms on each floor, and so on. This presents an overly limited
view of the possibilities for technology and infrastructure integration.
It becomes sort of a physical manifestation of technological
determinism, and as such tends to stifle innovation.

This analysis can be applied to understanding why Internet Service
Providers are reluctant to provide services to rural or geographically
impractical areas. Because they are thinking first of the technology,
the desire to provide extraneous services becomes less important. The
major investments ISPs have in infrastructure drives them to maintain
the status quo by promoting traditional infrastructural arrangements out
of self-interest. Mackenzie writes, "according to cultural theory,
corporate assimilation of the new communications technologies tends to
reject the relevance of places or practices that it does not create or
manage.[^70] Deploying and maintaining networks comes at a cost to the
ISPs, and rural or geographically remote areas increase this expense due
to the difficulty of installing network infrastructure. As ISPs are
generally profit-driven, they can be unwilling to provide services to
these locations due to the overhead in cost.

Alternative models of connectivity can invert the traditional approach
of technology led innovation, by providing an opportunity for user-led
innovation to expand the range of possibilities available to
communities. Building community networks is a valid option for some
areas, thanks in part to the advancement in wireless networking
hardware.

**Stacktivism**

Technology has been widely adapted by activist causes, and has increased
the approaches available to them. The ease with which data can be
transmitted has expanded the range of measures activists can take
advantage of to produce social change. This has given way to a subset of
technologically motivated activist movements, where participants have
taken advantage of social networking, encryption, and advanced wireless
communications technologies to this end.

One such subdivision is called Stacktivism, which is a research
methodology adopted by activists, seeking to bring awareness to network
infrastructure in the name of social responsibility. The term derives
from "the stack," referring to the protocol stack in network computing.
These protocols are the link between the physical infrastructure and
software interfaces used by humans. The most well known of this type of
stack is the Internet Protocol suite, consisting of seven interoperable
layers working together to transmit data on the Internet, however this
activity comes at a cost.

Stacktivism attempts to place the effect of networking infrastructure in
context with the environment. Environmental concerts can be a
contentious point; often they are glossed over, or reframed in the face
of scrutinizing the practices of tech companies. In particularly, the
tech world has increased its focus on providing cloud services,
promoting that term as a catchall describing data hosting for personal
and business usage. The usage of this term is misleading for several
reasons. It seems to imply an ephemeral and ecological connotation, and
it positions networking as an environmentally friendly activity. The
cloud is "out of sight, out of mind," and suggests that when interacting
with the cloud, your data floats safely and comfortable in the
atmosphere. Google provides a number of cloud services, including a
suite of productivity apps, and data storage. However Google's
datacenters are very real, and very large, with an ecological footprint
to match. Jon Koomey, a climate solutions researcher, issued a 2008
report declaring 2% of United States energy usage, and 1% of world usage
is consumed by data centers.[^71] [^72]

A 2011 Greenpeace report also suggests that the major technology
companies are not doing enough to reduce their impact on the
environment. There seems to be very little transparency from the
companies regarding their ecological footprint. According to the
Greenpeace Dirty Data Report Card, Google, Amazon, and Twitter were each
assigned a letter grade of F with regards to their transparency.[^73]
While it is not an easily managed issue, these concerns will require a
major effort and cooperation within the industry.

Jay Springett, who coined the term stacktivism, asserts "we cannot have
a conversation about something whilst it remains unseen."[^74] This
implies a necessity towards transparency and openness with
infrastructure, specifically with regards to the network stack. As the
world becomes increasingly connected online, the infrastructure
continues to remain a hidden element to most people. Awareness of the
infrastructure is limited usually to when it fails. For example, when
the Internet goes down in a building, or the power goes out at home.
Infrastructure owners take great pains to hide the wires and antennas
that do the physical work of transmitting data.

The "invisibility" of infrastructure also serves to mask its other
associated effects, such as environmental impact and humanitarian cost.
Casting a light on infrastructure serves to increase awareness and
understanding of its impact on society. Matt Ratto, an Assistant
Professor at the University of Toronto analyzes the pitfalls of
invisible infrastructure, highlighting the adverse effect of ignorance.

> By removing our knowledge of the glue that holds the systems that make
> up the infrastructure together, it becomes much more difficult, if not
> impossible, to begin to understand how we are constructed as subjects,
> what types of systems are brought into place (legal, technical,
> social, etc.) and where the possibilities for transformation
> exist.[^75]

At its worst, obfuscating the nature of how systems work by making them
proprietary strips our ability to exert control over these technologies
and trade freedom for convenience.

**The Emergence of the Stack**

The infrastructure components that work together to form the Internet
are part of a standard called the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI)
model.[^76] This model was first developed in 1978 as a response to the
myriad of proprietary connection models that had been established by
hardware manufacturers at the time. This model directly established the
networking standards which we use still to this day, and which are
referred to as "the stack," shown in figure 3.1.

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:OSI-stack.png](media/image7.png){width="5.122422353455818in"
height="4.585279965004374in"}

Figure 3.1: The OSI model of the stack

Developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in
1978, the Open Systems model was innovative early on, in part because
the ISO had never attempted to standardize a current and evolving
technology before.[^77] Their goal was to provide a universal means for
computer systems to communicate on the network, indiscriminate of the
host operating systems or platforms.[^78] The ISO built upon the
layering scheme laid out by ARPANET (discussed in Chapter 1), developing
the seven functions that are still in use today. Janett Abbate describes
each layer and its purpose as follows:

> The physical layer specifices how the network interface hardware will
> regulate the physical and electrical aspects of connections between
> machines. The link layer translates the flow of electrons across the
> physical medium into an ordered stream of bits, and decides when to
> transmit or receive messages from the medium. The network layer
> handles addressing, routing, and the host-network interfaces... The
> transport layer \[provides\] end-to-end control functions. The session
> and presentation layers... provide enhancements over transport
> service. The application layer... provides specific services, such as
> file transfer, remote login, or email.[^79]

The establishment of these layers was meant to provide a template with
which protocol designers could work with; the ISO was not attempting to
define the protocols themselves. The significance of the seven-layer
network stack is felt today, whereby it presents a useful template,
which network theorists can utilize to make sense of the causal
relationships between interoperable elements of the networked world.

Implementation of the Open Standards Initiative's model was wildly
successful and was a major victory for open software. By the late 1970's
proprietary systems and software had become the de facto standard,
eschewing the earlier sharing policies prevalent during the initial boom
of computer and networking development in the 1960's. Large
manufacturers could monopolize on networking hardware, forcing consumers
into being locked in to a narrow selection of products, and
incompatibility with competitors. Leading developers were in a position
to have a monopoly over the emerging networked world. "If IBM became
master of the network market, it would have a share---willingly or
unwillingly---of the world power structure" said the French government
in a 1978 issue of Electronics magazine.[^80]

The introduction of the OSI "significantly shaped the way computer
science professionals thought about networks."[^81] Henceforth, the OSI
model and its principle of layering, now popularly known as the stack,
substantially influenced all discussions of computer networking.
Manufacturers adopted the open standard, and it was particularly popular
in nations that felt trapped by the pressure to conform to proprietary
models such as such as IBM's. "\[Open Standards\] are seen as the last
hope for saving what remains of the indigenous computer industry."[^82]

**Wireless Networks and Infrastructure**

Of the seven layers of the stack, Wi-Fi operates in a space that spans
between two of them, the physical layer (PHY) and the link layer; or to
be more specific, the Media Access Control (MAC) sub-layer of the link
layer. The MAC layer is designed to organize and monitor access to the
network for more efficient and logical network management. While the
infrastructure supporting "clothesline" network technology is very well
situated in the physical layer (e.g. the cables and ports), wireless
networking inherently exists in both realms. It simultaneously exists as
a "new modality of communication infrastructure," while being an
invisible component of the chain of connectivity.[^83][^84] The use of
radio waves allows devices to join networks in a versatile and ad hoc
manner, producing an unstable and disorganized characteristic that
crosses physical boundaries and introduces a geo-political element of
connectivity that can be difficult to administer. There is a mobility
afforded by wireless connectivity that lends itself to freer interaction
with physical space for users. To interact with the network, the user is
no longer tethered to the infrastructure, and physical space is reshaped
by allowing movement. Of course, the "invisible" infrastructure still
exists and continues to exert its influence---move out of the signal
radius, and you're no longer connected.

Mackenzie co-opts the terminology of the layered network configuration
to identify two perspectives informing the understanding of Wi-Fi's role
in constructing space. He identifies the MAC layer as a strategy for
"rendering something visible," that being the connection between radios
using the Wi-Fi protocol. Ultimately he concludes this may be a less
desirable perspective with which to view Wi-Fi's relationship with
infrastructure and communication. The promise of "freedom" offered by
Wi-Fi in regards to the MAC idiom, is underpinned by an expectation of
accomplishing more "work" for the user. This is supported by corporate
subsidies of wireless "hotspots." For example, a major industrial
manufacturer of wireless chips, Intel, has made great efforts to provide
wireless access points in public locations such as airports, hotels, and
cafés, as well as promoting their existence to the public, seen as
potential customers.[^85]

Partners such as McDonalds and Starbucks, were leaders in integrating
public Wi-Fi access points into their infrastructure, which seems to
suggest an interest in binding commercialism with network access.[^86]
The result of these initiatives attempts to produce touchstones of open
access associated with commercial infrastructure under the guise of
mobility. Yet these configurations are exclusive by nature. Security for
wireless networks is a top concern for system administrators, and
efforts are made to prevent unauthorized access by those lacking proper
credentials. The freedom gained by uncoupling workstations from walls is
only applicable to individuals who are in turn still tied to the network
by way of their permitted access. These restrictions produce invisible
barriers to "unwanted others."[^87] Thus, using the MAC idiom to situate
wireless networks inherently reinforces a degree of top-down control
that attempts to separate the information contained within, from people
who don't have the right of access. "The MAC idiom practically
negotiates the redrawing of the boundaries between public and private
space, between corporate and noncorporate, between individual and
collective spaces" Mackenzie laments.[^88]

The other side of the coin, the PHY idiom, or the physical layer, takes
a more inclusive view of the properties of wireless networking.
Unrestricting the infrastructure is made possible by the Wi-Fi protocol
and associated hardware. This allows for more a more open take on using
physical spaces to incorporate communications infrastructure, therefore
producing more desirable outcomes by allowing people to congregate.

Alternative networks, such as community Wi-Fi initiatives, can create
even more nuanced networked spaces, and can be produced in a wide array
of locations. Breaking down barriers to wireless access can redefine the
capabilities of infrastructure. Wireless community networks often
subscribe to the terms in the Wireless Commons License. These guidelines
outline policies and recommendations for open adoption by any community
wireless projects. Because many of these initiatives do not have a
sturdy financial backing, the Wireless Commons License is an attempt to
provide a useful resource to aid in implementing effective community
networks. By applying Mackenzie's PHY idiom, wireless infrastructures
can become a space for public participation and collaboration,
encouraging community involvement. Comparing this to the closed and
exclusive nature of wireless networks developed under the principles
outlined by the MAC lens, open Wi-Fi networks produce an altered view of
space and infrastructure that is more beneficial in the context of
democratic policies. The invisible infrastructure is a more inviting and
interpersonal space that can facilitate discourse between groups and
individuals.

These two idioms represent binary modes of examining the same thing,
wireless networking. By contrasting them, we can see that elevating
certain characteristics produces vastly different results. One view sees
the potential for wireless networking to be used as an implement of
division, separating classes of people into those with or without access
to the network. The other shows promise of inclusiveness that supports
an ethos of sharing and cooperation. Mackenzie suggests that the
mobility afforded by Wi-Fi should be presented as "a mobility in
infrastructure itself," referring to the virtual space created by
networks as possible "site\[s\] of collective work."[^89] With this
viewpoint, networked infrastructure can be positioned as a place
bridging the gap between the real and virtual.

Using alternative networks to that end enhances our ability to exist as
digital citizens, and help to clarify the ways in which networked
cultures can interact with emerging networked spaces. In order to foster
a more open and democratic model of connectivity, it is essential that
wireless networks apply standards of openness to their implementation.
When integrating networking and infrastructure, a new form emerges that
exhibits influence on human interaction. Networked infrastructure
produces space that is greater than the sum of its parts. These two
situations are inextricably linked in the modern world. Geography exerts
influence over technology and vice versa. If they are thought about as a
unit, it is more effective for agents to harness these resources and
shape them to our benefit. In a future where all objects will have a
networking capacity, it makes sense that networks themselves will be
commodity. By inverting the commercial infrastructure model, we are able
to reclaim networked spaces by taking advantage of the power of
collaboration.

**The Black Stack**

Benjamin Bratton, a network theorist and Associate Professor at the
University of California, San Diego, has appropriated the metaphor of
the Internet stack to consolidate the many technological facets of
computer networking and place them in context with humanity, culture and
our relationship with the planet. In Bratton's version of the stack, the
Black Stack, there are seven layers that are interoperable and form the
basis of action and communication between agents interacting in the
modern age.[^90] The layers he defines, from the bottom upwards, are as
follows. Earth, Cloud, City, Network, Address, Interface, and User. In
accordance with the stack model, each of these elements forms a column
of action through which communication occurs at the bottom layer, thus
resembling a "U" shape. As an individual takes action, each layer is
activated from top to bottom, crossing to its adjoining column at the
Earth layer. In Figure 3.2, a single column of Bratton's stack is
presented.

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:theblackStack.png](media/image8.png){width="5.989583333333333in"
height="4.040972222222222in"}

Figure 3.2: Bratton\'s model of the stack

Bratton asserts that it is difficult, if not impossible, for the agent
(represented by the User layer) to be completely aware of the effects
and implications associated with activating each layer, due to the
obfuscated nature of computing and its relationship to the environment.
For example, when the user interacts with the Interface layer, the
address layer sends data to a receiving address by communicating over
the network, for example using a server. The server, a physical object,
has energy costs to maintain, as well as the impact of its
infrastructural placement and construction. There are numerous
procedures that were invoked upon fabricating the components, such as
obtaining materials and financing individuals to contribute to the
project. Each of these are inextricably linked by the manipulation of
resources.

The cloud layer, in Bratton's example, could be represented by tech
entities such as Google. By appropriating the word "cloud," Bratton is
subverting this nebulous and misleading term, as it is understood by the
mainstream culture, repurposing it for his vision, while at the same
time acknowledging its newfound permanence in our lexicon. Bratton's
cloud is not simply an advancement in data hosting for personal and
business convenience, but a governing body that has analogs to the
Westphalian state. Companies like Google are enacting more and more
policies that resemble services issued by the State, such as identity
politics and mobility services that are diffusing into the real world.
The jurisdiction of the cloud is widening to provide influence in
societal functions such as assigning geographic limitations governing
user behavior. One example of this influence is regional restrictions on
content. YouTube, for example, may let users view certain videos if they
are located in the United Kingdom, but the same content is not available
if they are located in the United States.

This assertion of power can have unexpected and dangerous results as is
evidenced in a 2010 border dispute between Nicaragua and Costa Rica.
Figure 3.3 shows a map of the two countries and the contested area.
Nicaragua authorized an initiative to dredge 33 kilometers of water
along a river bordering the two countries. It is alleged by a Costa
Rican news agency that this was justified by examining the area using
the Google Maps service, which erroneously displayed the border by
nearly 2.7 kilometers.[^91] A Google representative acknowledged the
error in the Google Maps service, while adding, "by no means should they
be used as a reference to decide military actions between two
countries."[^92] However, this incident illustrates the very real
authority that is held by non-state actors such as Google.

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:Nicaragua-and-Costa-Rica-border\_full\_600.jpg](media/image9.jpeg){width="3.872422353455818in"
height="2.894904855643045in"}

Figure 3.3: Disputed area betwen Nicaragua and Costa Rica

The shift that Bratton describes of State actors taking on elements of
the cloud, and vice versa, can be easily applied to alternative
networks. The space that now exists online that we call cyberspace, can
be split off into numerous sub-divisions, each with its own set of rules
governing space.

**Minfrastructure**

Miniature infrastructure devices are gaining popularity due to the ease
in which networking interfaces can be integrated into PCB boards.[^93]
Made possible by advancement in wireless networking technology, they
have the ability to deploy network infrastructure rapidly and flexibly.
Minfrastructure devices such as the Pinoccio, and Flutter wireless, can
be powered by small, rechargeable batteries, and have powerful radios to
broadcast their signal.[^94] While the throughput is currently low,
inventive developers can skirt around this by using creative programming
techniques. For example, server applications have been written to
require less computational power. Nginx and Node.js are two very
lightweight alternatives to the Apache web server (detailed in Chapter
1), which is one of the worlds most popular, yet requires a more
powerful system to operate.

**Splintering and Network Fragmentation**

While currently we look at cyberspace as a unified meta-space produced
by the cooperation of the pieces of the network, it is easy to apply
this concept to alternative networks that are not connected to the
Internet. Each isolated network would produce its own space, or world,
in which cyber-personas populate. Indeed configurations such as this are
emerging in various forms already all over the world. Additionally,
Privacy and security on the Internet is becoming a more widely accepted
topic of consideration for entities that utilize the Internet. Because
of this, researching the efficacy of developing network alternatives
will become a relevant subject for exploration in the near future.

The revelations of the National Security Agency's PRISM program have
ignited concerns of privacy, leading some countries to consider hosting
and managing private within their borders. Rather than using services
such as Google and Dropbox, these nations develop their own similar
services that can be controlled and maintained by themselves. Because
these, and many other similar service providers are United States
corporations, they are considered insecure due to NSA snooping concerns.

There is a strong opposition to this practice, mainly by the
corporations and interests of technology companies. Geographic
splintering of the Internet would result in increased difficulty for the
tech giants to continue providing the type of unified services that they
specialize in. This would produce a lessened ability to collect user
data, which is their main economic commodity. The data that these
corporations harvest provide incredibly detailed information on people's
habits, which is then used to produce targeted marketing and
advertisements.

Entities all over the world are looking at alternative means of engaging
with cyberspace for these reasons. In yet another example of cloud and
state swapping roles, there has been an initiative in some geopolitical
arenas towards fragmentation, or splintering of their networks.
Fragmentation of the Internet has also been referred to as
Balkanization, but some view this as a pejorative term which trivializes
the violence and bloodshed associated with the breaking up of the Balkan
peninsula in the 19^th^ century.

Regardless, the association with political boundaries is apt. Yet, the
initiative by state actors to contain their networks within national
borders, restricting how the networks are able to interact with the
wider Internet has been discouraged by some analysts.[^95] Still, many
countries are seeing this as a viable measure of security for national
data. Still, the NSA spying programs have provided an impetus for
countries to demand tighter control over network communications.

Brazil is one of the most prominent nations to implement the process of
fragmentation. After the PRISM scandal broke, their president, Dilma
Rousseff vocally opposed this practice, condemning the NSA's
international spying initiative. "Without the right of privacy, there is
no real freedom of speech or freedom of opinion, and so there is no
actual democracy... without respect for \[a nation's\] sovereignty,
there is no basis for proper relations among nations."[^96] Brazil began
enacting a policy to re-examine their nation's network infrastructure
and protect its data from inside its borders.

**Augé-Places and Coded Spaces**

In *Networked Publics* Kazy Varnelis employs the thoughts of
anthropologist Marc Augé as a fascinating lens through which to look at
online culture.[^97] Augé defines a separation between "places" and
"non-places," referring to physical spaces where people congregate or
pass through. Using his terms, a "place" connotes a notion of
togetherness, relationships and community, while the non-places are more
sterile, purely functional and devoid of emotion and connection. It is
an interesting take on the human relationship with infrastructure. Augé
argues that pure "places" are disappearing as our world is being taken
over by non-places. For example he lists some non-places as "airports,
airplanes, freeways, parking garages, but also refugee camps and
shantytowns."[^98] They do not support quality human interaction, and
instead guide people to perform functions of utility, such as
participating in commerce, or at their worst, oppressing people by
taking away choice.

These descriptors illuminate the notion that valuable human
relationships are in symbiosis with their environment. Take, for
example, large sporting arenas where thousands gather to watch an event
together. The infrastructure is both inspiring to us with their dizzying
structure, but also they are brought to life only by our presence. The
intertwined connection between person and place is even more dynamic
when using Augé's example to categorize the ties that bind us.

Extrapolating further, it becomes easy to understand how are interaction
with networked spaces produces meaning as well. In cyberspace, the
infrastructure is flat---there are no awe-inspiring arenas to marvel at.
And though the worldwide "series of tubes" is indeed an unknowable
super-structure, it is not made visible, and not sensed in the same
way.[^99] However, alternative networks that are integrated into a
visible space can marry the physical and the virtual spaces in exciting
ways.

Author Jason Farman in *Mobile Interface Theory* studies this concept of
embodiment through technology by situating it within the human
condition. He explains that our relationship with space goes beyond
simply existing within space, but rather that "space is constructed
simultaneously with our sense of embodiment."[^100] Rather than thinking
of our relationship with space as unconnected, Farman suggests that
consciousness itself produces space. Embodiment is the process through
which we interact with space, and that "those interactions dramatically
change the essential character of space."[^101] This applies to
networked space as well. When we interact with objects, people, and even
"bots" or rudimentary forms of AI, we are constructing space that's as
real online, as it is in the physical world.

**Geographic Scope**

Globalization and localization can work in concert and should be
considered as two sides of the same coin. The adage "think globally, act
locally" is applicable in the alternative networking movement. Much of
the character of the Internet has been ascribed to its ability to
connect the entire world. There is a benefit in this, to social and
economic applications. People tend to be more conscientious toward
members of their same group, and global networking can produce feelings
of inclusiveness. Conversely, local strategies have a positive impact on
using resources that can be obtained without the expended energy of
transporting them across large distances.

Alternative networks can add networking infrastructure to places that
don't have it, and can be done without intervention from major players
like ISPs. In other words, it can be accomplished by activist
organizations or local communities working together. Additionally,
alternative networks can be made privately and hidden, thus providing
local free network initiatives the ability to add network infrastructure
surreptitiously as deemed necessary.

ALTERNATIVE MODELS OF CONNECTIVITY
==================================

**Introduction to Alternative Networking**

Alternative networking is a broad term that refers to anything that
falls outside of the traditional model of connectivity. The traditional
model is where the end user connects via "last mile" access from an ISP
who, in turn, connects via backbone access from a Tier 1 provider. In
this example, the ISP is the gateway between the consumer and the
Internet. The ISP may own or lease the last mile infrastructure, and
therefore commands a large amount of control of how the data is shaped,
and how the infrastructure is deployed. Comcast, the country's largest
Internet provider, has been criticized for only providing infrastructure
to locations where it is commercially advantageous, thus leaving out
rural and poor areas that do not meet this criteria.[^102] Because many
of the important protocols and specifications that comprise the Internet
have been classified as open source, computer networking can exist and
be functional on its own, without needing to abide by the traditional
model.

Fortunately, there is a host of emerging technologies on the market that
will make development of alternative networking much easier. What was
once the exclusive realm of geeks and computer enthusiasts can now be
utilized by artists and activists. In the past decade, the evolution of
web design and other coding practices has swiftly jettisoned into the
realm of creativity and craft. This paradigm shift has set a precedent
for other technological endeavors, and computer networking has the
potential to follow a similar trajectory.

There are many tools that are available now to construct new networking
arrangements. Along with the rise of "maker culture" in the past few
years, creative hardware manufacturers have introduced dozens of
microcontrollers---small, use-specific computing devices---to the
market.[^103] Products like Pinnocio mesh networking "scouts" and Spark
Core Wi-Fi development boards are approximately the size of your thumb,
and come with out-of-the-box configuration. These emerging tools have
the potential to bring alternative networking into the mainstream.

**Characteristics of Alternative Networks**

The proposal of this research is that alternative networking can improve
digital democracy and combat the widening technology gap by adhering to
two principles. First, alternative networking should be able to provide
a low barrier of entry to set up. And second, it should be able to
provide useful and desirable services. Adhering to these two principles
will give alternative networking a shot at more widespread adoption.

Networks are sometimes viewed as mere infrastructure, or a means to an
end. Because people use networks as tools to access information online,
the perception exists that networks are static and utilitarian, but this
should be reconsidered.

When referring to networks in this context, the allusion is to the
elements of the network stack that work together to produce networked
spaces. This includes not just the topography, the nodes and edges, but
also the server units, including processors, memory, and disk storage.
It also includes the software that runs on the server, as well as
network cards that packetize the information and prepare it for delivery
over using the protocol. There are many "moving pieces" that work
together to give the impression of a single unit, and so this entire
unit should be understood as "the network." It should be noted that each
element that comprises the whole, is included a part. When these
components are working in concert, they produce networked space, or
cyberspace.

Digital technology has a mystique surrounding it that can give the
impression that it is impenetrable or unattainable to the common
individual. One of the reasons for this is its dense and complex syntax,
which, to the unfamiliar, can be daunting to overcome. Though there is a
learning curve, it is not insurmountable. At this stage in open source
development, many mature projects are fully realized; and with the help
of large discussion communities, learning how to work with technology is
easier than ever before. The continuation of this trend of inclusiveness
will be important for further adoption and propagation.

Dominant ISPs are able to provide extremely high bandwidth speeds to
many people due to their control of the last mile infrastructure and
vast financial resources. Newcomers like Google Fiber are offering major
competition to the incumbent ISPs by providing even faster speeds and
lowering the price of access, though this too is accomplished with the
benefit of a hefty financial backing. Alternative networks are mostly
small-scale, and community driven. They do not have the resources to
compete with ISPs, and that is not their intention. Rather than focusing
on bandwidth and throughput, alternative networks aim to provide more
versatile avenues of connectivity. Even so, in order to make a
successful contribution to the community, an alternative network must be
able to provide an acceptable end-user experience that facilitates
adoption. While bandwidth intensive applications such as large-scale
video streaming, a la YouTube.com, may be a long way off, there are many
services that can be integrated into an alternative network to make
people embrace them.

**A Simple Home Network**

One common example of an altnet would be a home network utilizing a
system called Network Attached Storage (NAS). This method is very
popular and easy to set up. There are several operating systems designed
around this system that can be configured in minutes. A NAS is a
centralized system, which means it has a single server that hosts all of
the data, and serves it to properly configured devices on the network.
The beauty of this type of network is that it doesn't require Internet
access to work. With just a server system and a router, a NAS can be
deployed nearly anywhere. The specialized operating system can also host
numerous additional services such as media streaming and folder
synchronization. Therefore someone using a NAS can easily create their
own services similar to Netflix and Dropbox on a private network. Again,
due to the open source nature of these services, they are accessible to
anyone with the technical skill to set it up; and because of the deep
community involvement associated with these open source projects, the
products are mature and the barrier of entry is fairly low. Keeping the
barrier of entry low is important, because it allows for a much wider
spectrum of individuals to learn how to build and configure this type of
network.

It is easy to see how a NAS can easily bring cloud-like services into
homegrown alternative networking scenarios with the appropriate
hardware. Although this hardware is not cheap, there is not a
substantial cost associated with it; a decently performing NAS can be
built with around \$500. But what if we need to bring the overhead down
below that figure? There are a plethora of emerging microcontrollers,
radio devices, and software solutions that are cheaply available and
perfect for deploying alternative networking solutions.

**Implementation of Alternative Networks**

Alternative models of connectivity can protect us from the
monopolization of the Internet by "state" or "cloud" entities. Because
the building blocks are available to everyone, people can take advantage
of the vast resources and create custom architectures to suit the needs
of their particular implementation. In doing so, people can help close
the digital divide, support digital democracy, and have the potential to
reinvigorate the public sphere by engaging their community.

Creating and deploying networks, whether isolated or linked to the
Internet, will become as easy and commonplace as building a webpage or
starting a blog. Advancements in website and blog hosting service gained
popularity in the early 2000's thanks to services provided by the now
defunct webhosting companies Tripod and Angelfire. It stands to reason
that personalized networks can follow in these footsteps thanks to the
popularity of small wireless integrated microcontrollers and recent
advancements in the field of software-defined radios (SDR).

SDRs are an area that has become prevalent among network enthusiasts.
This is software that handles takes on some of the workload that make
hardware radios on embedded systems more complex, allowing for
simplified hardware that can reduce cost for manufacturers and
hobbyists. Typically open source, SDRs can provide powerful capabilities
to hardware radios, and have been reported to intercept cellphone
communications and detect IMEI-catchers (phony cell towers, used in
man-in-the middle attacks by hackers and government agencies.)[^104]

Another networking field that is gaining momentum is mesh networking and
ad hoc networking. Often they work in tandem, providing versatile
configurations for networks. Ad hoc networking operates on tier 1 of the
OSI model, the physical layer, whereas mesh networking operates on layer
3, the network layer. Because ad hoc only enables single
device-to-device connections, by incorporating mesh router, nodes in the
network can all talk to one another. This type of configuration can be
implemented in nodes placed in cars, telephone poles, buildings
stoplights, bridges, and other infrastructural locations to provide
pervasive and ubiquitous networking all over. Figure 4.1 shows a diagram
of an ad hoc mesh network, featuring both fixed and mobile nodes.

Pervasive, ubiquitous networking is coming fast, and it is imperative
for the public to stay ahead of the curve and take control early on to
prevent state and cloud entities from monopolizing the services.
Mastering low cost networking hardware and emergent protocols are of key
importance to maintaining openness in network infrastructure.

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:mesh3.gif](media/image10.gif){width="4.804166666666666in"
height="3.5569444444444445in"}

Figure 4.1: Model of a mobile ad hoc mesh network

New hardware advancements can make it easy to deploy alternative
networks for personal, business and other use. New protocols can help
prevent against certain types of hacking and cyber attack. These
advancements are helping people take more control over technology, and
networking should follow this trend.

**Google project loon**

Google has been working on a project using ad hoc mesh routing to bring
connectivity to remote locations. The world is vast and there are far
reaches of the planet where installing the physical infrastructure
required to connect to the Internet seems unfathomable. Taking a cue
from weather balloons, which can collect information about atmospheric
conditions, Google is designing its own version of a balloon containing
Wi-Fi transmitters that share a signal with one another, and connect to
an antenna on the ground. The balloons are capable of distributing their
signal nearly 500 square miles. Figure 4.2 shows the scale of the
balloons as two technicians work on them.

This initiative, dubbed "Project Loon," is a result of Google's secret
Project X team, which does research and development on some of the more
outlandish and speculative ideas holding "moon shot" status. Google
Glass, and the self-driving car are two other products that have emerged
out of Project X.

The methodology behind these types of projects seems to be: start with a
big idea, and work your way backwards from there. In other words, put
the concept ahead of the execution. The project has advanced to the
point where Google is in talks with telecommunications providers to
bring Loon to the mainstream. Senior Vice President Sundar Pichai said
in a recent interview with *Verge*, \"We think the model is really
beginning to work, and we have started large-scale testing... We'll be
working with carrier partners around the world so they can build their
services on top of our backbone.\"[^105] The project has high hopes and
can be reflective of the future possibilities for audacious alternative
networking techniques.

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:projectloon.jpg](media/image11.jpeg){width="6.0in"
height="3.370833333333333in"}

Figure 4.2: Two of Google\'s wireless-network balloons

**CJDNS**

In addition to hardware components, there are a number of emerging
network protocols which add to the practice of building alternative
networks. Right now, approximately 90% of Internet traffic uses the IPv4
protocol, with IPv6 swiftly becoming a practical alternative. CJDNS is
one project using IPv6 which implements an encrypted IPv6 network, and
is intended to be a viable and secure alternative connection method than
IPv4.[^106] CJDNS is that it treats each node in a distributed,
non-hierarchical fashion. As a result the protocol lends itself to being
used in mesh networking applications, the founder's stated goal is "to
have every node connected directly by physical means; be it wire,
optical cable or radio waves."[^107] CJDNS is a recently developed IPv6
networking protocol that it is not compatible with IPv4. What this means
is, you cannot access sites directly from the "surface web." As
development continues, CJDNS networks will create de facto alternative
networks by nature of the separation it produces.

While not inherently a network unto itself, CJDNS is designed to route
traffic primarily over private mesh networks. The protocol is a response
to the existing protocols of TCP/IP, which were written decades ago and
are becoming less effective to provide security and reliability on the
Internet. As the Internet has grown significantly since its inception,
the current practices are seen as inadequate by proponents of CJDNS and
mesh networking. The key principle that CJDNS is built upon is
encryption and integrity.[^108] Many of the security issues facing sites
on the Internet, particularly DDOS attacks, are due to manipulation of
flaws in the TCP/IP system. The protocols written decades ago by ARPANET
have become a kludge.[^109] In tech-language, a kludge is a pejorative
term to describe something that was hastily built and assembled in a
messy fashion, using disorganized parts. For vulnerabilities and
security issues, patches are written and overwritten again to meet new
requirements, this alternative has been written from the ground up to
provide superior performance.

One flaw of current networking architecture is centralization; CJDNS is
intended to be used in a distributed configuration. Traditionally when a
user types a human-readable web address into their browser, this is sent
to a centralized domain name server (DNS), where it is matched with the
appropriate, numeric IP address. This is problematic because as the
database grows, performance issues arise due to the large amount of
entries the server must quickly analyze. The CJDNS system does not
centralize IP addresses, but rather auto-generates them
cryptographically and are uniquely assigned to hosts.[^110]

**Isolated networks**

With so many options for hardware and software, building networks has an
exciting future in front of it, and the capability to invert the
traditional models of connectivity. Anyone from hobbyists, to enterprise
entities can design and build a unique network topography to suit their
needs.

Networks can probe for objects due to the inherent nature of wireless
connectivity---the call and response action of a device pinging an
access point, or vice versa, and the exchange of unique MAC addresses.
This action, gives a network more agency and allows for networks to be
used as tools of discovery, or as Bratton might view it, jurisdiction
over access.[^111]

Networks are inherently jurisdictions, they allow or deny access to
individuals or objects based on their credentials. In Bratton's model of
the stack, the cloud layer represents online jurisdictions, or "polis'"
as he calls them. Alternative networks such as private isolated
networks, or infrastructurally integrated geotechnical networking are
logical extension of this concept, further marrying the geopolitical
aspects of the state, with the cloud, on a smaller scale.

I think cloud and state entities, as they merge, will develop into
smaller groups of networks, creating micro-states, or cloud-polis,' and
carrying with them an aura of mystique, desirability and exclusivity.
Networks can exist in a wide variety of states and configurations.
Whether centralized or distributed, hierarchical or mesh, connected to
the Internet or isolated, networks can be deployed to adapt to many
scenarios.

A common criticism regarding iso-nets is about practicality. People
question the necessity for isolated, private networks based on a
utilitarian perspective of networks. But the network does not have to be
posited as a tool, it should be viewed as a space for human interaction.
And as such, it does not require an explanation for its application.
Social behaviors can be produced and organized around many phenomena.
Psychology has taught us that people find meaning in causes or
affiliations. One of the most successful developments of networking
technology with regards to sociology is social media. The corporate
leaders in this field are Facebook, Twitter, Google, Linkedin, Tumblr,
and Instagram. Each of these services has millions of subscribers who
interact with one another in cyberspace regularly. Also, massive
multiplayer online games (MMOG) follow suit with enormous amounts of
people participating with one another. While certainly there is a
refined aspect and a cutting-edge presentation style about these
services, but it could be argued that the social aspect is the most
compelling reason people participate in both online social networking,
and MMOG's.

Some of the emergent technologies that can be used to design alternative
networks are not powerful enough to accommodate today's most popular
network services, especially graphic-intensive MMOG's and
high-definition video streaming. Rather than view this limitation as a
detriment, it can be better reframed as a funnel for creatively coded
applications. Sometimes restrictions can provide an infrastructure for
inventiveness, such as Twitter's 140-character "tweet" limit, or their
companion video service, Vine's, six-second video loop. Internet Relay
Chat is another very lightweight, but fundamental service that can be
installed on an alternative network, providing a simple but effective
method for communications.

With that in mind, alternative networks already have a precedent for
producing social space, and there's no reason that this space should be
assigned strictly to the Internet. Private, or isolated alternative
networks will provide unique experiences within their own networked
space. This understanding will place these emerging networked spaces in
a viable position for adoption and development, particularly because of
the attraction of harnessing and defining relationships, rules and
experiences within networks.

**Future Evolution**

It was not long ago when building websites was the exclusive domain of
knowledgeable individuals with a strong background in computers and
programming. It started as an underground phenomenon, paralleling the
rise of programming in the 1980's. Writing and hosting a website in the
1990's required a lot of skill due to the fact that the technology was
still relatively new. The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) was
conceived by Tim Berners-Lee in 1989, and its first documented version
(v.09) was released in 1991. However, the concept took traction,
becoming more popular each year. Instruction manuals and guidebooks
exposed HTML code to enthusiasts all over the world, creating a large
community of architects to design the web. Many other web-programming
languages such as JavaScript, PHP, & MySQL followed suit. The
underground community soon evolved into a major business sector, and now
the Internet industry is worth over one-hundred billion dollars
worldwide.[^112] After Berners-Lee, HTTP and HTML, dozens of languages
and protocols have started as small, homegrown entities, and risen to
fame by exponential growth in participation. The vast majority of these
projects are adopted due to the accessibility afforded by FOSS
guidelines, as well as providing useful or necessary services to the
community.

Alternative networks big and small have a future along these lines. In
no small part due to the decreasing size and cost of hardware
technology, particularly innovations in wireless, networking projects
are becoming more and more frequent. Ten years ago the consumer market
was populated with relatively few hardware networking options; wireless
routers were about it. Succeeding this, USB Wi-Fi dongles became popular
because they could add wireless capability to a desktop or another
machine without it. Now wireless chips can fit in the size of dime and
can be attached to nearly anything. This allowed hardware manufacturers
to fit them into smartphones, which proliferated their widespread
adoption within the last five years.

This should be encouraging to individuals who are interested in building
their own "boutique" network infrastructure. With networking hardware
following the cycle of Moore's law, it is easy and affordable to build
and deploy personalized networks, and incorporate a virtual space into
any physical space.[^113] The research suggests there is a growing
interest in the field, with the many resources and communities of
developers offering their support.

**Cognitive networks**

Another advancement that seeks to enhance the versatility of alternative
networking is the introduction of "cognitivity" to communications
technology, in this case, networking. The concept behind cognitive
networks is an extension of the field of cognitive radio, and a logical
next step in its development. The main feature of both technologies is
the concept of cognition---more specifically adaptation of procedures to
suit changing environmental conditions. In the case of cognitive radio,
the unit will dynamically change its wireless channels to make the best
possible connection in a particular scenario. For example if the area is
saturated with wireless signals on channel 1, a device enabled with a
cognitive radio feature will switch to a different channel with less
interference.[^114]

The cognitive network takes this concept further by embracing the whole
stack. While cognitive radio only utilizes the physical and link layer,
cognitive networks take advantage of each compositional layer of
networking.[^115] Networks already have certain properties that give it
a sort of "self-awareness." For example they must understand how many
connections exist at a given time, and they know how to route incoming
and outgoing data. Researchers in the field of cognitive networking are
making advances that enhance these capabilities, and add even more
dynamic decision-making functions. Imbuing senses upon networks will
allow for less necessary intervention from human agents. This will lead
to proliferation of cognitive networks in the future. Cognitive networks
will be able to learn from their surroundings and make decisions based
on input. Additionally they will be able to learn from their mistakes by
avoiding repetition of unsuccessful procedures. Because of this, network
cognitivity will be an important trait to integrate into alternative
networking configurations.

**Sensor Networks**

Alternative networking techniques can be beneficial to humans in other
ways beyond impacting social relationships and decreasing the digital
divide. Thanks to developments in shrinking network hardware, sensors
can be embedded with communications devices to aid us in better
understanding the relationship we have with our planet.

The Internet is not only populated by the human actors creating and
engaging with content.[^116] There are many artificial, automated agents
communicating with one another that exist without human interaction as
well. For example many delivery systems have sensors that report their
whereabouts to tracking databases to maintain efficient routes. Data,
taking the form of barcodes and QR codes, traverse the Internet helping
to provide accountability to the supply chain. The past decade has seen
a rise in appliances that communicate over the network. This is
popularly referred to as the "Internet of things," because of the myriad
of networked objects that perform their functions quietly amongst one
another until human input is required. Security cameras, weather
sensors, and even home automation utilize network connections with
increasing frequency. Consumers can control home thermometers, lighting,
lawn irrigation, and property access by using Internet connected
devices. These services ostensibly make our lives easier by
consolidating management to personal devices and automation.

Machines can now interact with the physical world by way of sensors in
increasingly complex ways. While it is still a developing field, sensor
networks have great potential to be used to help the environment and
provide an effective interface with humans and the physical world.
Wireless sensor networks have many applications to enhance environmental
and human safety in ways that would not have been possible even a decade
ago. They detect subtle changes that would be imperceptible to humans,
and provide feedback to environmentalists who monitor fragile
ecosystems. The amount of data that can be catalogued helps ecologists
and biologists form complex models that can predict trends and produce
robust analysis of current conditions.

In addition to being able to provide scientists with more accurate
models of environmental conditions, sensor networks can be beneficial in
other ways. The devices can be deployed in locations that would be
dangerous for humans to observe close-up for a long period of time.
Scientists are utilizing these networked systems in Northern Ecuador to
monitor volcanic activity for example.[^117] They can also provide
information on pollution levels in high-risk urban areas. They can be
deployed in mines to alert workers of unsafe conditions. They can be
deployed in rivers and lakes to monitor human impact, or in the ocean to
study changes in the Jetstream.

By augmenting our ability to protect the environment, sensor networks
act in service to humankind as a whole, providing enhancements to our
perceptions of events taking place in the environment. They are a
valuable addition to the pantheon of alternative networking techniques
due to their ability to present heightened awareness, and act as an
interface between the planet and ourselves.

**Altnets Conclusion**

This research explores the emergence of network alternatives to the
global Internet. New spaces for computer networking to exist are waiting
to be discovered. This could be through new and updated protocols, and
also through the use of advanced new technology. Wireless routing
hardware is becoming more specialized and can be adapted to use for
smaller, private network solutions. What is special about this is that
individuals and groups that participate in this concept will be bringing
their own interests, skills, and motivations to the table. With these
tools, the paradigm of the Internet can be re-evaluated.

USE-CASES
=========

**RONJA and User-Initiated Innovation**

One of the valuable outcomes for adopting alternative models of
connectivity is to bind participants together over a mutually beneficial
outcome. By nature, community designed networks involve teamwork between
individuals and groups to construct effective networks that are reliable
and produce favorable results for network access. This is exhibited by
the user collaboration among alternative networking projects such as
Guifi in Catalina, and RONJA technology developed by a group of
technology enthusiasts in the Czech Republic in 2001. RONJA stands for
Reasonable Optics Near Joint Access, and it is a networking technology
that uses visible red light to transmit data between devices. The RONJA
project was established under the precept that its users should control
the network. Aside from providing enhanced, dependable network
connectivity, the project was a great case for the benefits of employing
user-initiated innovation in an alternative networking
environment.[^118]

The field of innovation studies (IS) has done research on the efficacy
of various forms of innovation. In particular IS research has looked at
user-initiated innovation to determine the motivations and outcomes of
movements in the field. One conclusion that has been drawn is that users
innovate to fulfill a perceived inadequacy in current commercially
available models. In his article *Free Space Optics* researcher Johan
Soderberg problematizes this supposition for not considering political
motivations among user-innovators. Soderberg's research claims that the
IS model is only half sufficient because ideals among groups innovating
from the ground up, particularly in the technology community, are also
driven by goals stemming from political factors surrounding
commercialization and co-option of technology by profit-making entities.
A more robust understanding of the value of user-initiated innovation
takes into account both factors.

In many technology projects, the free and open source (FOSS) model of
development is a foundation for their beliefs. Sharing and
collaboration, rather than preventing intellectual property from being
restricted for profit, is a defining characteristic the FOSS movement.
The Czech wireless initiative studied by Soderberg conforms to the same
ideals.[^119] It is an important distinction, because proponents of this
model see the philosophy of openness as contributing to a greater good
in society. This belief solidifies a political motivation for their
networking innovations. Wireless networking in particular has minimized
the necessary infrastructure for building networks and generated
excitement toward the possibility of decentralization of communications
networks that support democratic and civic ideals.

Indeed one of the founding tenants for the Czech RONJA project states
that "anyone lacking previous knowledge of electronics should be able to
build the device."[^120] RONJA achieves this end by providing detailed
schematics of hardware configuration, as well as ensuring that the
transmitters and receivers are built using easily accessible, off the
shelf components.[^121]

The technical details of building a RONJA node include, in part, the
innovative use of everyday objects which, in keeping with the hacker
mentality, are culled together in what might appear to be a haphazard
manner. Figure 5.1 shows a RONJA transmitter and receiver pair,
illustrating user ingenuity. Soderberg cites the use of "pineapple cans"
which could be viewed as analogous to the way in which some people have
employed "Pringles" cans to amplify Wi-Fi signals far beyond their
intended range. Colloquially referred to as a "cantenna," inventive
tinkerer's simply install a small Wi-Fi antenna inside of a cylindrical
metal can to directionally guide the radio waves. While electronics
hardware can be purchased to achieve the same ends, the philosophy of
user control within RONJA, strived to provide components that were not
proprietary, nor cost prohibitive for users. Another example of this was
implementing a common magnifying glass to focus the optic signal, even
though commercial optical lenses were available at a higher cost. Using
such unorthodox methods allows costs to be reduced significantly;
Soderberg estimates a RONJA link can be produced for less than 100
euro.[^122]

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:ronja\_pmv.jpg](media/image12.jpeg){width="5.989583333333333in"
height="4.495138888888889in"}

Figure 5.1: A RONJA transmitter and receiver pair

The RONJA devices did not use Wi-Fi radio signals however, they employed
the technique of free optics. This configuration uses LED light in its
transmitter, and a photodiode in the receiver.[^123] When facing one
another in a position with a clear line of sight, the LED "blinks"
rapidly, and the photodiode converts the signal into electronic charges,
which are then interpreted as binary data by the computer network. In
the early 2000's, the 10Mbs speed of free optic communication was a
major enhancement over Wi-Fi technology, which operated with much less
throughput. This, coupled with a transmission distance of over 1km, made
RONJA an appealing means of networking and brought about widespread
adoption to the effect hundreds of RONJA connections.[^124]

**Guifi**

Of all the alternative networking projects, Guifi is would probably be
the largest. At the time of this writing (\@guifinet on twitter updates
every day) there are 28,109 actives nodes on the network.[^125] It is a
community owned, mostly wireless mesh network located in Catalonia,
Spain. By setting up a node, individuals extend the network, and agree
to share their connection with others. Guifi has become the touchstone
for community built networks due to the unprecedented adoption of its
services in Spain, and even other parts of the world.

By virtue of being community owned and operated, Guifi exhibits
characteristics associated with community led initiatives. Particularly
the transition from technically minded collaboration, to a more
inclusive environment providing opportunities for individuals who don't
posses technical knowledge. The early stages of a community built
network are typically lead by operatives with a strong background in
deploying network infrastructure.[^126] This is essential to solidifying
the foundation of the network and maintaining functionality. As the
network grows, however, political elements are introduced, such as
enacting social policies around its use.

The pioneers of Guifi anticipated this and developed the Wireless
Commons license (WCL) to provide a template that could be adopted and
applied by organizations seeking to deploy community networks. Adhering
to the tenants set forth in this document provided a means for the
network operators to ensure consistency and operability as the network
grew. The WCL outlines policies regarding network management, use of the
wireless spectrum, security, liability, and services. Additionally four
main tenants are issued elaborating on its function. Translated from
Spanish, they read:

> You are free to use the network for any purpose, unless you are
> affecting the network availability and/or the freedom of the other
> users.

You are free to know how the network works, and its components.

You are free to use the network for any type of communication and
promote it.

> By joining the free and open network, you are helping to extend the
> network in the same conditions.[^127]

By outlining these concepts, the creators demonstrate a commitment to
grow as an organization, and provide a useful service to their
community. Notably, transparency is a featured as an important concept
contributing to its development, which fosters collaboration and opens
the door for improvement by user contributions, as illustrated in Figure
5.2.

![Macintosh
HD:Users:philbain:Documents:School:Thesis:images:guifi.jpg](media/image13.jpeg){width="5.989583333333333in"
height="2.9895833333333335in"}

Figure 5.2: Volunteers work together to set up a wireless node on the
Guifi network

In *Wireless Commons against the Digital Divide* three researchers from
the University Pompeu Fabra in Barcelona, provide an analysis of the
Guifi network. The paper investigates the characteristics that have led
to the widespread success and adoption of the organization, despite
being established in a rural town in Spain, a country with one of the
lowest percentages of Internet adoption in Europe.[^128] Their
conclusions attribute this to a mixture of "geographic, demographic, and
even socio-political components."[^129] Catalonia is comprised of
mountainous and desert climate conditions that seriously hinder the
deployment of traditional networking models. Spain's leading
telecommunications operator, Telefonica, left rural residents without
reliable broadband access. Another contributing factor to Guifi's
popularity was the allure of community engagement. Guifi's thorough
documentation provided instructions for adding nodes based on all levels
of technical proficiency. It was viewed by the population as a unifying
social experiment, and participants were provided with technical
support, reflecting the inclusive goals laid out by the wireless commons
license. This even included sponsoring of nodes for people who didn't
have the means to purchase the required componentry.

**Isaac Wilder and the Free Network Foundation**

Another organization concerned with providing open access to the
Internet is the Free Network Foundation. The FNF was founded by Isaac
Wilder and Charles Libel in 2011, with the purpose of providing
resources for activists and enthusiasts of developing free and open
networks. Wilder and Libel were fortuitous, in that their projects were
developed at the same time that the Occupy Wall Street movement began in
New York City in 2012. The group found likeminded people at the movement
who were interested in their networking initiatives. Their first
successful project was a something called the Freedom Tower, which was a
nine-foot tall antenna that broadcast secure wireless Internet to
protestors at Occupy, and underprivileged areas.[^130]

**Red Hook Wireless Network**

The Red Hook wireless networking project is exemplary of the power
alternative networks can have to engage in community involvement while
combating social inequality. Red Hook Wi-Fi is built using mesh
networking infrastructure, where nodes are placed in strategic locations
on rooftops in the densely packed neighborhood. Born from the
dissolution of communications infrastructure after Hurricane Sandy
debilitated much of New York City in 2012, the Red Hook wireless
initiative promotes community engagement and empowerment of the youth.

The project employs "digital stewards," comprised of students who wish
to learn about networking technology. The digital stewards are paid
hourly to maintain the mesh nodes, and are trained on the technical
specifications of the complex mesh networking procedure. The technology
training is a component of the Red Hook initiative, which is a community
learning center for youth in the area. According to their website, 75%
of participants in the Wi-Fi program go on to gain employment or further
their education.[^131]

Providing Internet access to neighborhood residents is one of the main
goals of Red Hook Wi-Fi, but the networked is designed to be operative
even if the Internet goes down. In an interview with the New York Times,
Robert Smith, a digital steward, describes the goal of the Red Hook
network to exist as an independent platform for communications for the
neighborhood in the event that access to the Internet becomes
disrupted.[^132] Providing network services and technology training to
the community as other benefits as well because it typically leads to
expanded innovation. Stewards at the RHI learn other cutting edge skills
like 3D modeling and website design.[^133]

By focusing on community engagement and development, Red Hook is shown
to subscribe to the idea that networking projects should be thinking
locally. "The general narrative of Silicon Valley is, build an app and
change the world." Explains Joshua Breitbart, a programmer who designed
the software Red Hook uses, "there should be room to say, 'Build an app
and change my neighborhood.'" This supports the notion that community
networking projects are just as valuable on a smaller scale as they are
on a global scale.[^134]

**Hyperboria**

Seattle has a history of utilizing technology for activist purposes. In
November 1999, the city played host to a large-scale mobilization
movement protesting the World Trade Organization's international
conference being held there. One thing that set the "battle for Seattle"
apart from other protests was the widespread use of "cybercasting," or
video streaming the events taking place during the protests.[^135] The
website indymedia.com hosted these live streams, and their viewers
totaled 1 Million, more than the news agency CNN's coverage during the
protests.[^136]

One of the largest mesh networking projects in the United States is also
hosted in Seattle, called Hyperboria. This network uses the CJDNS
protocol described in Chapter 4. Users of Hyperboria are building the
network infrastructure apart from the Internet by using some of the
technologies described in this paper, such as long range mesh networking
antennas. While Hyperboria started in Seattle, cities across the country
are building their own networks and forming "meshlocals" or local groups
dedicated to working with this technology.

Hyperboria is considered a "darknet," meaning a communications network
designed to protect privacy and promote security. The more the network
emphasizes these characteristics, the more "dark" it is.[^137] The
security and scalability of the network, thanks to the implementation of
the CJDNS protocol, makes Hyperbora a project worth following.

**Conclusion**

Computer networking has evolved significantly since it was first
conceived. The collaborative and open nature of its foundational codes
are imprinted upon its DNA, fostering connections and cooperation to
help bring about social good. By presenting humankind with new
interfaces to find our place in the world, communications technologies
will become intertwined with its effects. However, it is a tool, and it
can be used for purposes both positive and negative. The emergence of
alternative models of connectivity will face a trial as it becomes more
widely adopted, and it is up to those who continue to work with the
technology make a constructive impact. By sharing work, and providing
support for one another, the architects of the future can maintain the
ethos that propelled it to the magnitude we see today.

**REFERENCES**

Abbate, Janet. *Inventing the Internet*. MIT Press, 2000.Alexa Internet,
Inc. "Alexa Top 500 Global Sites," 2015.
http://www.alexa.com/topsites.Associated Press. "Cogent CEO: Comcast
Purposefully Slowed down Netflix Streaming." *San Jose Mercury News*,
May 8, 2015.
http://www.mercurynews.com/business/ci\_25723988/cogent-ceo-comcast-purposefully-slowed-down-netflix-streaming.Ben
Popper. "Inside Project Loon: Google's Internet in the Sky Is Almost
Open for Business." *The Verge*. Accessed April 30, 2015.
http://www.theverge.com/2015/3/2/8129543/google-x-internet-balloon-project-loon-interview.Brian
Anderson. "Free the Network." *Motherboard*. Accessed April 24, 2015.
http://motherboard.vice.com/read/motherboard-tv-free-the-network.Brian
L. Roberts. "Comcast / Time Warner Cable / Charter Transactions
Terminated." Press Statement, April 24, 2015.
http://corporate.comcast.com/news-information/news-feed/comcast-twc-charter-transactions-terminated.Castells,
Manuel. *Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet
Age*. Cambridge, UK; Malden, MA: Polity, 2012."Cjdelisle/cjdns."
*GitHub*. Accessed November 10, 2014.
https://github.com/cjdelisle/cjdns.Clifford, Stephanie, and Quentin
Hardy. "Attention, Shoppers: Store Is Tracking Your Cell." *The New York
Times*, July 14, 2013.
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/15/business/attention-shopper-stores-are-tracking-your-cell.html.Cohen,
Noam. "Red Hook's Cutting-Edge Wireless Network." *The New York Times*,
August 22, 2014.
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/24/nyregion/red-hooks-cutting-edge-wireless-network.html.David
Ingram. "Americans Take Dim View of Comcast, Time Warner Cable Deal."
*Reuters*, March 26, 2014.
http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/03/26/us-usa-antitrust-idUSBREA2P0BD20140326.*Dissembling
Stacktivism*. Panel Discussion, 2014.
https://vimeo.com/112968107.Electronic Frontier Foundation. "The
Customer Is Always Wrong: A User's Guide to DRM in Online Music."
*Electronic Frontier Foundation*. Accessed April 28, 2015.
https://www.eff.org/pages/customer-always-wrong-users-guide-drm-online-music.Farman,
Jason. *Mobile Interface Theory: Embodied Space and Locative Media*. New
York: Routledge, 2012.Feller, Joseph, Brian Fitzgerald, and Scott A.
Hissam. *Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software*. MIT Press,
2007.Fitzek, Frank H. P, and Marcos D Katz. *Cognitive Wireless Networks
Concepts, Methodologies and Visions Inspiring the Age of Enlightenment
of Wireless Communications*. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer, 2007.
http://public.eblib.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=371556.Free
Software Foundation, Inc. "What Is Free Software?" *GNU.org*, 2015.
https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html.Garlington, Tom, Joel
Babbitt, and George Long. "Analysis of Free Space Optics as a
Transmission Technology." *US Army Information Systems Engineering
Command* 3 (2005).Gitlin, Todd. *The Whole World Is Watching: Mass Media
in the Making & Unmaking of the New Left*. University of California
Press, 1980.Glanz, James. "Data Centers Waste Vast Amounts of Energy,
Belying Industry Image." *The New York Times*, September 22, 2012, sec.
Technology.
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/23/technology/data-centers-waste-vast-amounts-of-energy-belying-industry-image.html."Google
Maps Blamed for Conflict Between Costa Rica and Nicaragua." *The Tico
Times*. Accessed April 14, 2015.
http://www.ticotimes.net/2010/11/05/google-maps-blamed-for-conflict-between-costa-rica-and-nicaragua.Greenpeace.
"New Greenpeace Report Digs up the Dirt on Internet Data Centres."
*Greenpeace International*. Accessed April 23, 2015.
http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/news/features/New-Greenpeace-report-digs-up-the-dirt-on-Internet-data-centres/.Guifi.
"The Wireless Commons License - WCL in English \| Guifi.net." Accessed
April 28, 2015. https://guifi.net/en/WCL\_EN.Gylfason, Thorvaldur. *From
Collapse to Constitution: The Case of Iceland*. Springer, 2013.
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-88-470-5331-1\_22.Herbst,
Susan. *Numbered Voices: How Opinion Polling Has Shaped American
Politics*. University of Chicago Press, 1995.Hizonner. "Definition of
Darknet? • /r/darknetplan." *Reddit*. Accessed April 29, 2015.
https://www.reddit.com/r/darknetplan/comments/32qch3/definition\_of\_darknet.John
Battelle. "The Internet Big Five - John Battelle's Search Blog." *John
Battelle's Search Blog*, 2011.
http://battellemedia.com/archives/2011/12/the-Internet-big-five.php.Koomey,
Jonathan G. "Worldwide Electricity Used in Data Centers." *Environmental
Research Letters* 3, no. 3 (July 2008): 034008.
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/3/3/034008.Leo Mirani. "Millions of Facebook Users
Have No Idea They're Using the Internet." *Quartz*, February 9, 2015.
http://qz.com/333313/milliions-of-facebook-users-have-no-idea-theyre-using-the-internet/.Lynch,
Colum. "Brazil's President Condemns NSA Spying." *The Washington Post*,
September 24, 2013.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/brazils-president-condemns-nsa-spying/2013/09/24/fe1f78ee-2525-11e3-b75d-5b7f66349852\_story.html.Mackenzie,
A. "Untangling the Unwired: Wi-Fi and the Cultural Inversion of
Infrastructure." *Space and Culture* 8, no. 3 (August 1, 2005): 269--85.
doi:10.1177/1206331205277464.McChesney, Robert Waterman. *Digital
Disconnect: How Capitalism Is Turning the Internet against Democracy*,
2013.McLuhan, Marshall, and Lewis H. Lapham. *Understanding Media: The
Extensions of Man*. McGraw-Hill, 2003.Meinrath, Sascha. "We Can't Let
the Internet Become Balkanized." *Slate*, October 14, 2013.
http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future\_tense/2013/10/internet\_balkanization\_may\_be\_a\_side\_effect\_of\_the\_snowden\_surveillance.html.Metahaven.
"The Cloud, the State, and the Stack: Metahaven in Conversation with
Benjamin Bratton." Accessed April 4, 2015.
http://mthvn.tumblr.com/post/38098461078/thecloudthestateandthestack.Monica,
1776 Main Street Santa, and California 90401-3208. "Paul Baran and the
Origins of the Internet \| RAND." Accessed February 23, 2015.
http://www.rand.org/about/history/baran.html.Morozov, Evgeny. *The Net
Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom*. 1st ed. New York: Public
Affairs, 2011.Mossberger, Karen. "Toward Digital Citizenship: Addressing
Inequality in the Information Age." *Routledge Handbook of Internet
Politics*, 2009, 173--85.Mueller, Eingestellt von Florian. "FOSS
Patents: More Evidence of Google's Habit of GPL Laundering in Android:
The BlueZ Bluetooth Stack and the ext4 File System." Blog. *FOSS
Patents*, 2011.
http://www.fosspatents.com/2011/03/more-evidence-of-googles-habit-of-gpl.html.Natalie
Wolchover, and Life's Little Mysteries. "Why Is Everyone on the Internet
So Angry?" News. *Scientific American*, July 25, 2012.
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/why-is-everyone-on-the-internet-so-angry/.Nick
Arnott. "What's Really Happening with iOS 8 MAC Address Randomization?"
*iMore*, September 29, 2014.
http://www.imore.com/closer-look-ios-8s-mac-randomization.OECD.
*Internet Access*. OECD Publishing, June 25, 2014.
http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/internet-access/indicator/english\_69c2b997-en.Oliver,
Miquel, Johan Zuidweg, and Michail Batikas. "Wireless Commons against
the Digital Divide." In *Technology and Society (ISTAS), 2010 IEEE
International Symposium*, 457--65. IEEE, 2010.
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs\_all.jsp?arnumber=5514608.Otani,
Akane. "America's Most Loved and Most Hated Companies." *Bloomberg.com*,
February 6, 2015.
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-02-05/america-s-most-loved-and-most-hated-companies.Papacharissi,
Zizi. "The Virtual Sphere 2.0: The Internet, the Public Sphere and
beyond." *Routledge Handbook of Internet Politics, New York: Routledge*,
2008, 230--45.Rainie, Lee, Janna, erson, and Jennifer Connolly. "Cyber
Attacks Likely to Increase." *Pew Research Center's Internet & American
Life Project*. Accessed April 29, 2015.
http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/10/29/cyber-attacks-likely-to-increase/.Ratto,
Matt. "Ethics of Seamless Infrastructures: Resources and Future
Directions." *International Review of Information Ethics* 8, no. 8
(2007): 21--25.Red Hook Initiative. "Red Hook WIFI \| Red Hook
Initiative," 2015. http://rhicenter.org/red-hook-wifi/.Reed, Thomas
Vernon. *The Art Of Protest: Culture And Activism From The Civil Rights
Movement To The Streets Of Seattle*. U of Minnesota Press,
2005.Robinson, James. "UK's Internet Industry Worth £100bn - Report."
News Agency. *The Guardian*. Accessed April 28, 2015.
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/oct/28/net-worth-100bn-uk.Shaun
Nichols. "Looking for Laxatives, Miss? Shoppers Stalked via Smartphone
Wi-Fi." Article. *The Register*, April 24, 2015.
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2015/04/24/ftc\_nomi\_settlement/.Smith,
Gerry. "AT&T, Comcast Have Spotty Record Of Giving Internet To Rural And
Poor." *The Huffington Post*. Accessed April 27, 2015.
http://social.huffingtonpost.com/2014/06/12/att-comcast-mergers\_n\_5484595.html.Soderberg,
J. "Free Space Optics in the Czech Wireless Community: Shedding Some
Light on the Role of Normativity for User-Initiated Innovations."
*Science, Technology & Human Values* 36, no. 4 (July 1, 2011): 423--50.
doi:10.1177/0162243910368398."Statistics - YouTube." Accessed April 29,
2015. https://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html.Stewart Brand.
"Wired 9.03: Founding Father." Archive. *Founding Father*, 2001.
http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/9.03/baran\_pr.html.TALtech. "A
Brief Overview of TCP/IP Communications \| TALtech." Accessed April 30,
2015.
http://www.taltech.com/datacollection/articles/a\_brief\_overview\_of\_tcp\_ip\_communications.Tan,
Yen Kheng. *Energy Harvesting Autonomous Sensor Systems Design, Analysis
and Practical Implementation*, 2013.
http://www.crcnetbase.com/isbn/9781439894354.*The Stack: Design and
Geopolitics in the Age of Planetary-Scale Computation*. Simon Fraser
University, Vancouver, B.C., 2014.
http://www.bratton.info/projects/talks/the-stack-design-and-geopolitics-in-the-age-of-planetary-scale-computation/.Tim
Barwell. "Comcast, NBC Deal Faces Financial, Legal Obstacles, WSJ
Reports - Bloomberg," October 3, 2009.
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=a2SjVIOXnSLI.Varnelis,
Kazys. *Networked Publics*. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2008.W3Techs.
"Usage Statistics and Market Share of Apache for Websites, April 2015,"
2015.
http://w3techs.com/technologies/details/ws-apache/all/all.Werner-Allen,
Geoffrey, Konrad Lorincz, Mario Ruiz, Omar Marcillo, Jeff Johnson,
Jonathan Lees, and Matt Welsh. "Deploying a Wireless Sensor Network on
an Active Volcano." *Internet Computing, IEEE* 10, no. 2 (2006):
18--25.Wilder, Isaac. Interview with Isaac Wilder of the Free Network
Foundation. Interview by Adrienne Russell, 2014, 2014.Wired.co.uk, Mark
Brown. "Nicaraguan Invasion? Blame Google Maps." *WIRED*, November 8,
2010.
http://www.wired.com/2010/11/google-maps-error-blamed-for-nicaraguan-invasion/.Wu,
Tim. "Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination." *Journal of
Telecommunications and High Technology Law* 2 (2003): 141.---------.
*The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires*. Alfred A.
Knopf, 2010.

**APPENDIX**

i.  The Flutter wireless is the result of kickstarter campaign to
    develop high-range wireless nodes that can be deployed in mesh
    scenarios. Its range of 1km far surpasses its competitors. It costs
    approximately \$40 for one board. http://www.flutterwireless.com

ii. PCB, or printed circuit boards are hard, flat boards that have
    circuitry embedded (printed) upon them, along with other microchips.
    They are one of the most common means for integrating electronics
    with hardware. Recently there has been an emergence of companies
    offering to produce PCBs at a low cost, which has led to a growing
    culture of non-corporate electronics manufacturing.

iii. The Pinoccio is similar to the flutter wireless in that it is a
    wireless mesh node. While it has a smaller wireless signal radius,
    it is designed to easily incorporate additional chips (called
    "backpacks") that extend its functionality. The Pinoccio also has a
    well-supported development interface on its website, where users can
    write and share code used for projects. <https://pinocc.io/>

iv. Maker culture is a subset of do-it-yourself (DIY) culture that makes
    ample use of 3-D printing technology and wireless networking
    advancements (see Appendicies i, ii, and iii). The focus is
    typically a convergence of robotics, 3-D printing, computer
    programming and networking.

[^1]: Metahaven, "The Cloud, the State, and the Stack: Metahaven in
    Conversation with Benjamin Bratton," accessed April 4, 2015,
    http://mthvn.tumblr.com/post/38098461078/thecloudthestateandthestack.

[^2]: Evgeny Morozov, *The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet
    Freedom*, 1st ed (New York: Public Affairs, 2011).

[^3]: Karen Mossberger, "Toward Digital Citizenship: Addressing
    Inequality in the Information Age," *Routledge Handbook of Internet
    Politics*, 2009, 173--85.

[^4]: Marshall McLuhan and Lewis H. Lapham, *Understanding Media: The
    Extensions of Man* (McGraw-Hill, 2003)., 23

[^5]: Susan Herbst, *Numbered Voices: How Opinion Polling Has Shaped
    American Politics* (University of Chicago Press, 1995)., 2

[^6]: Todd Gitlin, *The Whole World Is Watching: Mass Media in the
    Making & Unmaking of the New Left* (University of California Press,
    1980)., 10

[^7]: Metahaven, "The Cloud, the State, and the Stack."

[^8]: Wilder, Isaac, Interview with Isaac Wilder of the Free Network
    Foundation. Interview by Adrienne Russell, 2014, 2014.

[^9]: TALtech, "A Brief Overview of TCP/IP Communications \| TALtech,"
    accessed April 30, 2015,
    http://www.taltech.com/datacollection/articles/a\_brief\_overview\_of\_tcp\_ip\_communications.

[^10]: Stewart Brand, "Wired 9.03: Founding Father," Archive, *Founding
    Father*, (2001),
    http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/9.03/baran\_pr.html.

[^11]: 1776 Main Street Santa Monica and California 90401-3208, "Paul
    Baran and the Origins of the Internet \| RAND," accessed February
    23, 2015, http://www.rand.org/about/history/baran.html.

[^12]: Janet Abbate, *Inventing the Internet* (MIT Press, 2000)., 18

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Ibid., 74

[^15]: Joseph Feller, Brian Fitzgerald, and Scott A. Hissam,
    *Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software* (MIT Press, 2007).,
    51

[^16]: Free Software Foundation, Inc, "What Is Free Software?,"
    *GNU.org*, 2015, https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html.

[^17]: Eingestellt von Florian Mueller, "FOSS Patents: More Evidence of
    Google's Habit of GPL Laundering in Android: The BlueZ Bluetooth
    Stack and the ext4 File System," Blog, *FOSS Patents*, (2011),
    http://www.fosspatents.com/2011/03/more-evidence-of-googles-habit-of-gpl.html.

[^18]: Kazys Varnelis, *Networked Publics* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
    2008).

[^19]: W3Techs, "Usage Statistics and Market Share of Apache for
    Websites, April 2015," 2015,
    http://w3techs.com/technologies/details/ws-apache/all/all.

[^20]: Feller, Fitzgerald, and Hissam, *Perspectives on Free and Open
    Source Software*., 166

[^21]: Ibid., 164

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: John Battelle, "The Internet Big Five - John Battelle's Search
    Blog," *John Battelle's Search Blog*, 2011,
    http://battellemedia.com/archives/2011/12/the-Internet-big-five.php.

[^24]: Electronic Frontier Foundation, "The Customer Is Always Wrong: A
    User's Guide to DRM in Online Music," *Electronic Frontier
    Foundation*, accessed April 28, 2015,
    https://www.eff.org/pages/customer-always-wrong-users-guide-drm-online-music.

[^25]: Alexa Internet, Inc., "Alexa Top 500 Global Sites," 2015,
    http://www.alexa.com/topsites.

[^26]: "Statistics - YouTube," accessed April 29, 2015,
    https://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html.

[^27]: Leo Mirani, "Millions of Facebook Users Have No Idea They're
    Using the Internet," *Quartz*, February 9, 2015,
    http://qz.com/333313/milliions-of-facebook-users-have-no-idea-theyre-using-the-internet/.

[^28]: Tim Wu, *The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information
    Empires* (Alfred A. Knopf, 2010).

[^29]: Stephanie Clifford and Quentin Hardy, "Attention, Shoppers: Store
    Is Tracking Your Cell," *The New York Times*, July 14, 2013,
    http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/15/business/attention-shopper-stores-are-tracking-your-cell.html.

[^30]: Shaun Nichols, "Looking for Laxatives, Miss? Shoppers Stalked via
    Smartphone Wi-Fi," Article, *The Register*, (April 24, 2015),
    http://www.theregister.co.uk/2015/04/24/ftc\_nomi\_settlement/.

[^31]: Ibid.

[^32]: Ibid.

[^33]: Nick Arnott, "What's Really Happening with iOS 8 MAC Address
    Randomization?," *iMore*, September 29, 2014,
    http://www.imore.com/closer-look-ios-8s-mac-randomization.

[^34]: Tim Wu, "Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination," *Journal
    of Telecommunications and High Technology Law* 2 (2003): 141.

[^35]: Ibid.

[^36]: David Ingram, "Americans Take Dim View of Comcast, Time Warner
    Cable Deal," *Reuters*, March 26, 2014,
    http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/03/26/us-usa-antitrust-idUSBREA2P0BD20140326.

[^37]: Tim Barwell, "Comcast, NBC Deal Faces Financial, Legal Obstacles,
    WSJ Reports - Bloomberg," October 3, 2009,
    http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=a2SjVIOXnSLI.

[^38]: Associated Press, "Cogent CEO: Comcast Purposefully Slowed down
    Netflix Streaming," *San Jose Mercury News*, May 8, 2015,
    http://www.mercurynews.com/business/ci\_25723988/cogent-ceo-comcast-purposefully-slowed-down-netflix-streaming.

[^39]: Akane Otani, "America's Most Loved and Most Hated Companies,"
    *Bloomberg.com*, February 6, 2015,
    http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-02-05/america-s-most-loved-and-most-hated-companies.

[^40]: Brian L. Roberts, "Comcast / Time Warner Cable / Charter
    Transactions Terminated," Press Statement, (April 24, 2015),
    http://corporate.comcast.com/news-information/news-feed/comcast-twc-charter-transactions-terminated.

[^41]: Lee Rainie et al., "Cyber Attacks Likely to Increase," *Pew
    Research Center's Internet & American Life Project*, accessed April
    29, 2015,
    http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/10/29/cyber-attacks-likely-to-increase/.

[^42]: Morozov, *The Net Delusion*., 9

[^43]: Mossberger, "Toward Digital Citizenship."

[^44]: Zizi Papacharissi, "The Virtual Sphere 2.0: The Internet, the
    Public Sphere and beyond," *Routledge Handbook of Internet Politics,
    New York: Routledge*, 2008, 230--45.

[^45]: Ibid.

[^46]: Ibid.

[^47]: Frank H. P Fitzek and Marcos D Katz, *Cognitive Wireless Networks
    Concepts, Methodologies and Visions Inspiring the Age of
    Enlightenment of Wireless Communications* (Dordrecht, the
    Netherlands: Springer, 2007),
    http://public.eblib.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=371556., 686

[^48]: Herbst, *Numbered Voices*.

[^49]: Papacharissi, "The Virtual Sphere 2.0.", 233

[^50]: Natalie Wolchover and Life's Little Mysteries, "Why Is Everyone
    on the Internet So Angry?," News, *Scientific American*, (July 25,
    2012),
    http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/why-is-everyone-on-the-internet-so-angry/.

[^51]: Papacharissi, "The Virtual Sphere 2.0.", 235

[^52]: Ibid.

[^53]: J. Soderberg, "Free Space Optics in the Czech Wireless Community:
    Shedding Some Light on the Role of Normativity for User-Initiated
    Innovations," *Science, Technology & Human Values* 36, no. 4 (July
    1, 2011): 423--50, doi:10.1177/0162243910368398.

[^54]: Tom Garlington, Joel Babbitt, and George Long, "Analysis of Free
    Space Optics as a Transmission Technology," *US Army Information
    Systems Engineering Command* 3 (2005).

[^55]: On Diaspora, user data is located on decentralized servers spread
    out across the user base. These servers form individual networks
    (known as "pods," in Diaspora) as opposed to Facebook, which stores
    user data centrally on their own servers. This helps alleviate user
    data tracking practices and allows for greater user control over the
    privacy and visibility of their profiles.

[^56]: Mossberger, "Toward Digital Citizenship."

[^57]: Ibid.

[^58]: Ibid.

[^59]: Ibid.

[^60]: Robert Waterman McChesney, *Digital Disconnect: How Capitalism Is
    Turning the Internet against Democracy*, 2013., 4

[^61]: Gitlin, *The Whole World Is Watching*., 10

[^62]: Manuel Castells, *Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements
    in the Internet Age* (Cambridge, UK; Malden, MA: Polity, 2012)., 31

[^63]: Ibid., 38

[^64]: OECD, *Internet Access* (OECD Publishing, June 25, 2014),
    http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/internet-access/indicator/english\_69c2b997-en.

[^65]: Thorvaldur Gylfason, *From Collapse to Constitution: The Case of
    Iceland* (Springer, 2013),
    http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-88-470-5331-1\_22.

[^66]: The term "cyberspace" was coined by Science Fiction author
    William Gibson in 1982. The United States Military has been using
    the term since at least 2006, when it instated a Cyber Command
    division of the US Strategic Command.

[^67]: CAT is short for category, also referred to as Ethernet cables,
    these are the physical connections between computers and the wired
    internet infrastructure. CAT-6 are newer successors to the CAT-5
    cables, which are still common in wired networks.

[^68]: A. Mackenzie, "Untangling the Unwired: Wi-Fi and the Cultural
    Inversion of Infrastructure," *Space and Culture* 8, no. 3 (August
    1, 2005): 269--85, doi:10.1177/1206331205277464., 270

[^69]: See Appendix i

[^70]: Mackenzie, "Untangling the Unwired."

[^71]: James Glanz, "Data Centers Waste Vast Amounts of Energy, Belying
    Industry Image," *The New York Times*, September 22, 2012, sec.
    Technology,
    http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/23/technology/data-centers-waste-vast-amounts-of-energy-belying-industry-image.html.

[^72]: Jonathan G Koomey, "Worldwide Electricity Used in Data Centers,"
    *Environmental Research Letters* 3, no. 3 (July 2008): 034008,
    doi:10.1088/1748-9326/3/3/034008.

[^73]: Greenpeace, "New Greenpeace Report Digs up the Dirt on Internet
    Data Centres," *Greenpeace International*, accessed April 23, 2015,
    http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/news/features/New-Greenpeace-report-digs-up-the-dirt-on-Internet-data-centres/.

[^74]: *Dissembling Stacktivism*, Panel Discussion, 2014,
    https://vimeo.com/112968107.

[^75]: Matt Ratto, "Ethics of Seamless Infrastructures: Resources and
    Future Directions," *International Review of Information Ethics* 8,
    no. 8 (2007): 21--25.

[^76]: Abbate, *Inventing the Internet*., 167

[^77]: Ibid., 168

[^78]: Ibid.

[^79]: Ibid., 170

[^80]: Ibid., 172

[^81]: Ibid., 171

[^82]: Ibid., 172

[^83]: Clothesline networks are a colloquialism referring to wired
    networks due to the lengthy category 5 and 6 cables resembling
    clotheslines.

[^84]: Mackenzie, "Untangling the Unwired.", 276

[^85]: Ibid., 277

[^86]: Ibid., 278

[^87]: Ibid., 278

[^88]: Ibid.

[^89]: Ibid.

[^90]: Metahaven, "The Cloud, the State, and the Stack."

[^91]: Mark Brown Wired.co.uk, "Nicaraguan Invasion? Blame Google Maps,"
    *WIRED*, November 8, 2010,
    http://www.wired.com/2010/11/google-maps-error-blamed-for-nicaraguan-invasion/.

[^92]: "Google Maps Blamed for Conflict Between Costa Rica and
    Nicaragua," *The Tico Times*, accessed April 14, 2015,
    http://www.ticotimes.net/2010/11/05/google-maps-blamed-for-conflict-between-costa-rica-and-nicaragua.

[^93]: See Appendix ii

[^94]: See Appendix iii

[^95]: Sascha Meinrath, "We Can't Let the Internet Become Balkanized,"
    *Slate*, October 14, 2013,
    http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future\_tense/2013/10/internet\_balkanization\_may\_be\_a\_side\_effect\_of\_the\_snowden\_surveillance.html.

[^96]: Colum Lynch, "Brazil's President Condemns NSA Spying," *The
    Washington Post*, September 24, 2013,
    http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/brazils-president-condemns-nsa-spying/2013/09/24/fe1f78ee-2525-11e3-b75d-5b7f66349852\_story.html.

[^97]: Varnelis, *Networked Publics*., 18

[^98]: Ibid.

[^99]: Senator Ted Stevens in 2006 referred to the Internet as a "series
    of tubes," and was widely criticized in the media due to the overly
    reductive nature of the metaphor.

[^100]: Jason Farman, *Mobile Interface Theory: Embodied Space and
    Locative Media* (New York: Routledge, 2012)., 18

[^101]: Ibid.

[^102]: Gerry Smith, "AT&T, Comcast Have Spotty Record Of Giving
    Internet To Rural And Poor," *The Huffington Post*, accessed April
    27, 2015,
    http://social.huffingtonpost.com/2014/06/12/att-comcast-mergers\_n\_5484595.html.

[^103]: See Appendix iv.

[^104]: A man-in-the middle attack is when an attacker intercepts
    communications between two entities without their knowledge,
    obtaining potentially private information.

[^105]: Ben Popper, "Inside Project Loon: Google's Internet in the Sky
    Is Almost Open for Business," *The Verge*, accessed April 30, 2015,
    http://www.theverge.com/2015/3/2/8129543/google-x-internet-balloon-project-loon-interview.

[^106]: IPv4 the most popular network addressing system, allows for over
    4 billion naming addresses, which are quickly running out. The IPv6
    naming scheme allows for a potential of 3.4×10^38^ addresses, a
    number far outside of the realm of reasonable computation.

[^107]: "Cjdelisle/cjdns," *GitHub*, accessed November 10, 2014,
    https://github.com/cjdelisle/cjdns.

[^108]: "Cjdelisle/cjdns Whitepaper" *GitHub*, accessed November 10,
    2014, https://github.com/cjdelisle/cjdns.

[^109]: Ibid.

[^110]: Ibid.

[^111]: *The Stack: Design and Geopolitics in the Age of Planetary-Scale
    Computation* (Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, B.C., 2014),
    http://www.bratton.info/projects/talks/the-stack-design-and-geopolitics-in-the-age-of-planetary-scale-computation/.

[^112]: James Robinson, "UK's Internet Industry Worth £100bn - Report,"
    News Agency, *The Guardian*, accessed April 28, 2015,
    http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/oct/28/net-worth-100bn-uk.

[^113]: Moore's Law says that the number of transistors able to fit in a
    dense integrated circuit doubles approximately every two years. It
    is sometimes used to account for the explosion in computer
    development from 1980-2000, and also looked at as self-fulfilling
    prophecy.

[^114]: Fitzek and Katz, *Cognitive Wireless Networks Concepts,
    Methodologies and Visions Inspiring the Age of Enlightenment of
    Wireless Communications*.

[^115]: Ibid.

[^116]: Yen Kheng Tan, *Energy Harvesting Autonomous Sensor Systems
    Design, Analysis and Practical Implementation*, 2013,
    http://www.crcnetbase.com/isbn/9781439894354.

[^117]: Geoffrey Werner-Allen et al., "Deploying a Wireless Sensor
    Network on an Active Volcano," *Internet Computing, IEEE* 10, no. 2
    (2006): 18--25.

[^118]: Soderberg, "Free Space Optics in the Czech Wireless Community."

[^119]: Ibid.

[^120]: Ibid.

[^121]: Ibid.

[^122]: Ibid.

[^123]: Ibid.

[^124]: Ibid.

[^125]: See: https://twitter.com/guifinet

[^126]: Miquel Oliver, Johan Zuidweg, and Michail Batikas, "Wireless
    Commons against the Digital Divide," in *Technology and Society
    (ISTAS), 2010 IEEE International Symposium* (IEEE, 2010), 457--65,
    http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs\_all.jsp?arnumber=5514608.

[^127]: Guifi, "The Wireless Commons License - WCL in English \|
    Guifi.net," accessed April 28, 2015, https://guifi.net/en/WCL\_EN.

[^128]: Oliver, Zuidweg, and Batikas, "Wireless Commons against the
    Digital Divide."

[^129]: Ibid.

[^130]: Brian Anderson, "Free the Network," *Motherboard*, accessed
    April 24, 2015,
    http://motherboard.vice.com/read/motherboard-tv-free-the-network.

[^131]: Red Hook Initiative, "Red Hook WIFI \| Red Hook Initiative,"
    2015, http://rhicenter.org/red-hook-wifi/.

[^132]: Noam Cohen, "Red Hook's Cutting-Edge Wireless Network," *The New
    York Times*, August 22, 2014,
    http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/24/nyregion/red-hooks-cutting-edge-wireless-network.html.

[^133]: Red Hook Initiative, "Red Hook WIFI \| Red Hook Initiative."

[^134]: Cohen, "Red Hook's Cutting-Edge Wireless Network."

[^135]: Thomas Vernon Reed, *The Art Of Protest: Culture And Activism
    From The Civil Rights Movement To The Streets Of Seattle* (U of
    Minnesota Press, 2005).

[^136]: Ibid.

[^137]: Hizonner, "Definition of Darknet? • /r/darknetplan," *Reddit*,
    accessed April 29, 2015,
    https://www.reddit.com/r/darknetplan/comments/32qch3/definition\_of\_darknet.
